Bernadette Castel-Hollingsworth 
said
 at least two civilians were killed and many more were injured in the “horrific attack”, which also hit a 
UNHCR
-contracted warehouse. Significant amounts of aid and shelter materials were destroyed. 
She extended her deepest condolences to the families of the two warehouse workers who lost their lives and to the families of civilians killed in other attacks across Ukraine in the past 24 hours. 


Aid items destroyed
 
Ms. Castel-Hollingsworth said the warehouse was struck by a ballistic missile and caught fire.  Preliminary estimates revealed that some 900 pallets of aid items including blankets and hygiene kits – valued at more than $1 million – were destroyed in the attack.  
UNHCR and its partners were planning to distribute these supplies to evacuees and others in collective sites and transit sites, as well as to people whose homes have been damaged. 
“It is absolutely abhorrent that once again, premises of humanitarian work and aid items are damaged in these relentless air strikes, just as we witness repeatedly how humanitarian workers are being targeted when doing their jobs and delivering aid to those most in need,” she said. 
High risk of below-average rainfall in the Greater Horn of Africa  
Weather and climate experts predict a high likelihood of below-average rainfall for the northern Greater Horn of Africa during the critical rainy season from June through September, the World Meteorological Organization (
WMO
) 
said
 on Wednesday. 
The outlook was issued by the East Africa-based IGAD Climate Prediction and Applications Centre (ICPAC), which is part of the wider WMO regional network. 
It raises concerns for key sectors, with likely impacts on cultivation, water availability, livestock systems, hydropower generation, food security, and public health. 
The June to September rains account for over 50 per cent of annual rainfall in the northern and western parts of the Greater Horn of Africa, and more than 80 per cent in most parts of Sudan. 
Drier conditions
 
The forecast points to drier-than-usual conditions in South Sudan, Uganda, Ethiopia, Djibouti, much of Eritrea, Sudan, and western and coastal Kenya.  
The highest probability is projected for central, northeastern and northwestern Ethiopia; southern Sudan, and northern Uganda, where the likelihood of below-normal rainfall exceeds 60 per cent and reaches up to 80 per cent in northeastern Ethiopia. 
Meanwhile, isolated areas in northern Sudan, southeastern Ethiopia, and southern and northern Somalia are expected to receive enhanced rainfall. 
Areas of northern Sudan, southern coastal Somalia and Kenya are forecast to receive near-normal rainfall. 






© UNICEF/Ilvy Njiokiktjien


Children walk between shelters in a Rohingya refugee camp in Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh.






Bangladesh: $710 million appeal to support Rohingya refugees, host communities  
The United Nations and partners are seeking 
$710.5 million
 to support more than a million Rohingya refugees living in camps in Bangladesh and the local communities hosting them. 
The appeal launched in Dhaka on Wednesday is 26 per cent lower than in 2025.  
It aims to cover only the minimum required to provide lifesaving assistance across sectors such as food, shelter, and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), with $36.2 million allocated for host communities. 
Limited resources, rising needs
 
More than 1.2 million Rohingya – a predominantly Muslim ethnic minority from Myanmar – have found shelter in neighbouring Bangladesh. Most arrived a decade ago following targeted violence and persecution. 
Needs continue to rise as the Rohingya continue to flee conflict. Some 150,000 have arrived in Bangladesh since early 2024, which is straining limited humanitarian resources and putting extra pressure on overcrowded camps. 
The appeal comes amid growing global instability and rising pressure on humanitarian agencies, which have been forced to prioritise their operations amid rising needs. 
“As resources become more limited, it is more important than ever to help refugees build skills and resilience, so they can gain independence, hold on to hope, and rebuild their lives,” said Kelly T. Clements, Deputy High Commissioner of UNHCR, the UN Refugee Agency. 
“Until the Rohingya can return home in safety and can rebuild their communities there, we must continue to provide safety, care, and dignity where they are.”