Home
                    


 







                        Middle East
                    








Live


Middle East live: Trump seeks $88 billion in extra funding, mostly for Iran war






Issued on: 
25/06/2026 - 02:37
Modified: 
25/06/2026 - 04:04
 

















                President Donald Trump speaks as he meets with NATO Secretary General Mark Rutte in the Oval Office at the White House, Wednesday, June 24, 2026, in Washington.        © Jacquelyn Martin, AP    
 









                                US President Donald Trump asked Congress on Wednesday for nearly $88 billion in extra spending, most of it to cover the cost of the Iran war, at a moment of growing unease in both parties over the conflict and its political price. Follow our liveblog for the latest developments.            




 
 








25/06/2026 - 04:04
Trump, Republican senator engage in shouting match over Iran war


US President Donald ​Trump faced pointed criticism over the Iran war on Wednesday in a closed-door meeting with fellow Republicans, shortly before his administration asked Congress for tens of billions of dollars to pay for the conflict.
Several Republicans in the closed-door meeting said Trump engaged in a shouting match with Republican Senator Bill Cassidy, who said the administration needed to explain a framework deal Trump signed last week that provides financial incentives for Iran ​but does not accomplish any ‌of the goals he laid out at the war's beginning.
"The American people need to know more than we are being told," Cassidy told reporters. "It does ⁠not appear, although I don't know for sure, that the course of this is going the way that we were told."






25/06/2026 - 03:32
IRGC: new Hormuz route announced without Iran coordination is unacceptable, dangerous


Iran's ⁠Revolutionary ​Guards Corps ​on Thursday said safe passage through ​the ‌Strait ⁠of Hormuz ‌is only
possible through routes ⁠designated by Iran, and ​that a ‌new route announced without coordination with ‌Iran is ​unacceptable and a safety risk.
IRGC said it ​will take ​action against ​vessels that ​fail to comply with the requirements.






25/06/2026 - 02:41






25/06/2026 - 02:35
Trump seeks  nearly $88 billion in extra funding for Iran war


US President Donald 
Trump
 asked Congress on Wednesday for nearly $88 billion in extra spending, most of it to cover the cost of the 
Iran
 war, at a moment of growing unease in both parties over the conflict and its political price.
The White House request for $87.6 billion in supplemental funding includes tens of billions of dollars for the Pentagon, as well as money for US farmers, Ebola response efforts in central Africa and domestic infrastructure projects.
The proposal landed a day after Congress passed a largely symbolic resolution calling on 
Trump
 to end US hostilities with 
Iran
 unless lawmakers explicitly authorize military action.
It also came as the administration tries to turn a preliminary agreement with Tehran into a final settlement after months of war that rattled global energy markets, pushed up prices and exposed divisions inside 
Trump
's Republican Party.








 
US ⁠President ​Donald ​Trump said ‌a ⁠deal ‌with ⁠Iran that included ​fees ‌in ‌the ​Strait of Hormuz would be "unacceptable".
 
Hezbollah
 accused 
Israel
 of a new 
ceasefire
 "violation" after an Israeli drone killed two people in southern 
Lebanon
 a day after two people died in Israeli gunfire.
 
The Israeli 
military
 said it carried out an airstrike targeting suspected Hezbollah militants who crossed into the so-called "security zone" it has created in southern Lebanon, the second such incident it reported within hours.
 
 
(FRANCE 24 with Reuters, AP and AFP)


































As it happened





                                    Middle East
                            




















Keywords for this article