Israel-Lebanon talks begin in Washington - report
The fourth round of negotiations between Israeli and Lebanese officials have begun in Washington,
 according to Lebanon’s official National News Agency (NNA).
NNA has just reported the talks “began a short while ago” at the US state department headquarters.
We will bring you more as we get it.
Key events
Rubio says Iran has agreed to discuss aspects of its nuclear programme
US secretary of state Marco Rubio told lawmakers on Tuesday that 
Iran
 had agreed to negotiate aspects of its nuclear programme that it previously refused to discuss.
However, he said that was not a guarantee that talks will lead to a deal to end the US-Israeli war on Iran.
Rubio told senators Iran had intended to build up its conventional weapons capabilities as a “shield” for its nuclear program.
“What they tried to do is they were going to try to build a conventional shield and hide behind that conventional shield,” he said, explaining why US president 
Donald Trump
 felt it was imperative to launch the war.
Share
Updated at 
10.44 EDT
US secretary of state Marco Rubio faced chants from protesters who urged him to “stop killing Cubans” when he entered a Senate briefing room on Tuesday.
The protesters were quickly pulled from the room. Their chants also included “Let Cuba live!” as well as, “Repent Marco Rubio. God will forgive you for your sins. Stop killing Cubans.”
He is expected to face a litany of questions about the Trump administration’s fragile or stalling diplomatic efforts around the world when he appears for back-to-back hearings on Capitol Hill for the first time since the Iran war began.
Meanwhile, Donald Trump has tapped a close ally to serve as the country’s top intelligence official, days after Tulsi Gabbard 
announced her exit from the role
.
The US president said that 
Bill Pulte,
 head of the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), and heir to a home construction company fortune, will serve as acting director of national intelligence.
Director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency Bill Pulte pictured outside the White House in September 2025.
 Photograph: Mark Schiefelbein/AP
Pulte has used his role at the FHFA to 
publicly level of a string of extraordinary allegations
 at Trump’s political opponents and enemies.
“William has deep experience managing the most sensitive matters in America,” Trump said on his Truth Social Platform.
Pulte will remain director of the FHFA, Trump said.
Gabbard, herself a controversial pick for the job, resigned last month, ending a tenure that saw her appear to be at odds with Trump over 
Iran
 war.
We have an early image of the ambassadors of Israel and 
Lebanon
 ahead of a new round of direct talks in Washington:
Yechiel Leiter, Israeli ambassador to the US, and Nada Hamadeh, Lebanese ambassador to the US, attend a meeting with other officials hosted by the US at the state department in Washington.
 Photograph: Kent Nishimura/AFP/Getty Images
Israel-Lebanon talks begin in Washington - report
The fourth round of negotiations between Israeli and Lebanese officials have begun in Washington,
 according to Lebanon’s official National News Agency (NNA).
NNA has just reported the talks “began a short while ago” at the US state department headquarters.
We will bring you more as we get it.
Lebanon’s health ministry said Tuesday that Israeli strikes a day earlier near a hospital in the southern city of Tyre killed four people and wounded 127 others, including 39 staff from the facility.
The ministry statement said the wounded staff at the Jabal Amel hospital were “four doctors, 27 nurses, and eight [administrative] employees – four of whom are in critical condition and receiving treatment in intensive care”.
The attack “also caused severe and extensive damage across the hospital’s various floors, departments and parking lot,” it added.
German chancellor Friedrich Merz on Tuesday called on Israel to exercise restraint in its campaign in southern Lebanon, where a three-month war with 
Hezbollah
 has killed more than 3,400 and uprooted over 1.2m people.
Merz said Germany viewed the latest escalation in the south with great concern and urged Hezbollah to lay down its arms.
Israel’s weapons exports has reached an all-time high for a fifth year running,
 according to the country’s defence ministry.
In a statement, it said: “Israel’s all-time defence export record has been broken for the fifth consecutive year, with 
$19.2bn in 2025 – a nearly 30% surge compared to the previous year,
 more than doubling in five years and quadrupling in a decade.”
Israeli defence minister says US backs striking Beirut suburbs if Hezbollah attacks northern Israel
The Israeli defence minister, 
Israel Katz,
 said the US 
has backed plans to strike Beirut’s southern suburbs if 
Hezbollah
 attacks northern Israel.
The remarks came after Israel appeared to pull back from immediate threats of attacks on Beirut’s southern suburbs, known as Dahiyeh, following an intervention by US president 
Donald Trump
.
Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu visits soldiers along Israel's northern border on Saturday, accompanied by Israeli defence minister Israel Katz.
 Photograph: Israeli Prime Minister Office/APAImages/Shutterstock
In a speech during a defence export conference, 
as reported by Israel’s i24 news
, Katz said:


double quotation mark
Prime minister Netanyahu and I, together with the IDF, led a move aimed at establishing a new equation: Beirut’s Dahiyeh district will be treated the same as Israel’s northern communities. 
If Israeli towns continue to come under attack, we will evacuate and strike Beirut’s Dahiyeh district,
 Hezbollah’s main stronghold.


He added:


double quotation mark
The United States endorsed this principle
 and conveyed it to the Lebanese government and all relevant parties. The test of this policy will become clear in the coming days: either the attacks on Israeli communities stop, or if they continue and we strike Dahiyeh, the equation will have been enforced.


Katz also acknowledged that the IDF has issued warnings for people to flee their homes, saying it has led to “the evacuation of hundreds of thousands of residents – 600,000 out of 950,000 by last night”.
Here are the latest images from the site of an Israeli airstrike in the southern Lebanese city of Tyre, where the Jabal Amel hospital sustained severe damage from yesterday’s bombing on nearby buildings.
A medical worker looks at the damage in Jabal Amel hospital a day after an Israeli airstrike that targeted buildings in front of the hospital in Tyre, Lebanon.
 Photograph: Wael Hamzeh/EPA
A destroyed building that was hit Monday in an Israeli airstrike is seen through a shattered window of the hospital.
 Photograph: Mohammed Zaatari/AP
An ambulance near a car park outside the hospital.
 Photograph: Aziz Taher/Reuters
A man looks through the shattered windows of the damaged hospital.
 Photograph: Mohammed Zaatari/AP
The 
Israel
 Defense Forces (IDF) has once again issued a warning telling people in the southern Lebanese city of 
Nabatieh
 to flee their homes and move north ahead of strikes.
It is the third such warning in a week for one of southern Lebanon’s largest cities, home to tens of thousands of people, which has seen continued Israeli strikes in recent weeks despite a ceasefire.
Smoke billows from southern Lebanon, following Israeli strikes on Sunday, as seen from Nabatieh.
 Photograph: Reuters
The UK government has let the Palestinian people down and failed to make it economically impossible for Israel to continue to act with impunity in the West Bank and Gaza, the Labour chair of the foreign affairs select committee, 
Emily Thornberry
, has said.
She accused her own government of lacking ambition and wringing its hands on the Palestinian crisis, and she also chastised Donald Trump for declaring a ceasefire in 
Gaza
 and then walking away, leaving Gazans to live in rubble.
Thornberry has never been this critical of the government’s Middle East policy before and her remarks may find resonance in a potential 
Labour
 leadership contest that has so far included little mention of foreign policy.
She said the significant decision taken more than eight months ago to 
recognise Palestine as a state
 should have been only the first step of many but nothing further had been done since to help bring about a two-state solution.
Read more:
Netanyahu: 'Iran has paid a very heavy price and is destined to fall'
In a message to David Barnea, the outgoing director of the Mossad (Israel’s national intelligence agency), Israeli prime minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu
 said Iran has paid a “very heavy” price and is “destined to fall”.
He wrote on X:


double quotation mark
Yesterday we bid farewell to the outgoing head of the Mossad, Dedi Barnea.


The price Iran has already paid is a very heavy one.
 The foundations of this regime of terror in Iran have been shaken. It will never be what it once was, and I tell you – 
it is destined to fall.


On my own behalf, and on behalf of the entire nation, I have come to say to Dedi – thank you. Thank you for 30 years of dedicated service to the Mossad, and a special thank you for the last few years, which have yielded outstanding successes and achievements for the benefit of Israel’s security.


The Lebanese armed forces said 
two soldiers were injured “as a result of being targeted by a hostile Israeli drone”
 on a road between the towns of Habbouch and Deir ez-Zahrani in southern 
Lebanon
.
There was no immediate comment from the Israeli military.
At least 8 people killed in Israeli strikes in southern Lebanon - reports
Lebanon’s official National News Agency (NNA) has reported 
at least eight deaths this morning from Israeli bombings in southern 
Lebanon
.
That is despite 
Donald Trump
 announcing an agreement to halt attacks that neither Israel or Hezbollah have publicly accepted.
Israeli attacks were reported in the southern Lebanese towns of Jibchit, Toul and Kfar Sir just north of the Litani River, according to NNA. Other areas in the Nabatieh region were also targeted, NNA reported.
An Israeli airstrike on Tyre yesterday killed at least four people and severely damaged the city’s Jabal Amel hospital, according to NNA.
People gather at the site of an Israeli strike that hit near a hospital in the southern Lebanese city of Tyre on Monday.
 Photograph: Kawnat Haju/AFP/Getty Images
Share
Updated at 
07.42 EDT
The French foreign minister, 
Jean-Noël Barrot, 
has condemned Israel’s occupation of parts of Lebanon 
after Israeli troops seized the Beaufort,
 a Crusades-era castle south of the country.
An Israeli flag and a Golani Brigade flag fluttering atop the medieval Beaufort Castle in Arnoun, Lebanon.
 Photograph: AFP/Getty Images
“Nothing can justify the continuation of military operations and Israel’s prolonged occupation deep inside Lebanese territory,”
 he told France TV.
“That is why we have, of course, called for a ceasefire: that 
Hezbollah
 cease attacking Israel, that Israel cease attacking Lebanon, and that this dialogue, which has begun for the first time in so long between the Israeli and Lebanese governments, can continue.”
A fourth round of US-hosted direct negotiations between Israel and 
Lebanon
 is scheduled to begin today.
Summary: Conflict in Lebanon continues despite Trump hailing Israeli-Hezbollah de-escalation
Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s continuing coverage of the crisis in the Middle East.
Donald Trump
 has hailed an agreement to de-escalate the fighting in 
Lebanon
, which has killed thousands of people and inflamed tensions in the broader US-Israeli war with Iran.
Trump said 
Hezbollah
, through intermediaries, had pledged not to attack 
Israel
, while Israeli prime minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu
 agreed to pull back any troops preparing to attack Beirut.
“Let’s see how long that lasts – Hopefully it will be for ETERNITY!” Trump wrote on his Truth Social platform.
According to Lebanon’s embassy in 
Washington
, the agreement would not end the conflict in that country. But it calls for Israel to refrain from strikes on 
Beirut
 and its suburbs controlled by 
Hezbollah
, while the 
Iran
-aligned group would halt its attacks on Israel.
Traffic on a Beirut highway on Monday as residents flee after an Israeli threat to strike the southern suburbs.
 Photograph: Bilal Hussein/AP
Despite the agreement, hostilities in southern 
Lebanon
 – which Israel invaded in March – appeared to continue. This morning, the Israeli military said that it intercepted two projectiles that crossed from Lebanon into northern Israel, and that no injuries were reported.
After Trump’s announcement, Netanyahu said 
Israel
 would continue military operations in southern Lebanon, where ground forces are pushing toward the 
Zahrani River
, their deepest incursion in Lebanon in 25 years. His statement made no mention of a new ceasefire.
Hezbollah lawmaker 
Hassan Fadlallah
 said the group would support a full ceasefire across all Lebanon as a precursor to the withdrawal of Israeli troops. He did not say whether the group would stop its strikes on Israeli territory.
Lebanon said it would seek to expand the ceasefire in talks with Israel in Washington tomorrow. That could clear the path for renewed efforts to end the three-month-old war that began with US and Israeli attacks on 
Iran
. The process has been stuck in limbo for weeks under a fragile ceasefire as negotiators have been unable to agree on an initial framework for peace talks.
In other developments:




Iran’s Revolutionary Guards (IRGC) threatened to open “new fronts” and keep the strait of Hormuz closed over Israel’s offensive in Lebanon, state media reported. 
“Iran considers crossing the red lines in Lebanon and Gaza to mean direct war,” state TV quoted the IRGC’ intelligence organisation as saying.




The ceasefire already in place between Iran and the US is unequivocally a ceasefire on all fronts, including in Lebanon, Iran’s top diplomat said
 yesterday after Netanyahu ordered attacks on the Hezbollah-controlled southern suburbs of Beirut. “Violation on one front is a violation of the ceasefire on all fronts. The US and Israel are responsible for the consequences of any violation,” foreign minister 
Abbas Araghchi
 wrote on X.




US secretary of state Marco Rubio will face questions at Congress today for the first time since the Iran war began.
 He will testify before House and Senate committees on the state department’s 2027 budget request, where he is expected to face questions about Trump’s war efforts and shifting diplomatic goals.




Oil prices jumped and equities slid as Middle East peace talks stumbled and tensions mounted between Iran and the US. 
Crude futures shot more than 5% higher yesterday as an Iranian news agency announced Tehran had suspended the negotiations with the US via mediators, AFP reported.




US forces intercepted two Iranian ballistic missiles targeting American forces based in Kuwait late on Sunday
, the US military said yesterday. No American personnel were harmed, it added.


Share
Updated at 
03.54 EDT