Following the ceasefire announced on 17 April 2026 in Lebanon, the rate of displacement from Lebanon into the Syrian Arab Republic (hereafter referred to as Syria) has declined compared to the initial phase of the conflict. As a result, approximately 33,887 individuals have returned to Lebanon since the peak of displacement (153,087 arrivals recorded on 27 April 2026).


Between 2 March and 25 May, DTM recorded 119,200 individuals arriving across 1,238 locations spanning all 14 governorates in Syria. Arrivals were predominantly Syrian, with Lebanese nationals accounting for less than 1 per cent of those recorded.


As of 25 May, a total of 366,719 movements had been recorded along the four points of entry (PoEs) at the Syrian–Lebanese border where DTM tracks population movements into Syria. The majority of movements recorded involved Syrian nationals (97%), with 3 per cent Lebanese nationals. An additional 2,211 Lebanese nationals were reported to have transited through Syria to Jordan.


During the reporting period, key informants (KIs) reported that new arrivals from Lebanon were visiting for the upcoming Eid holiday, taking the opportunity to assess the situation in Syria. The arrival of new families increased the demand for already limited housing, posing challenges in securing suitable accommodation for returnee families. The arrival of new individuals during this period has exacerbated limited water supplies, health care, and other essential services, compounded by reports of decreasing humanitarian assistance. KIs further reported growing concerns related to persisting security challenges in Syria, increasing anxieties among returnees and their children. In Idleb Governorate, the death of three children and injury of four others as a result of a landmine explosion has fuelled uncertainty among returnee individuals travelling to Syria seeking a relatively stable security situation. Paired with the loss of livelihoods and high living costs in Syria, growing numbers of arrivals from Lebanon are considering return movements.


The situation remains fluid, and DTM continues to monitor developments.