Attacks and Displacement Continue in Lebanon | Page 1 
Attacks and Displacement Continue in Lebanon: NGOs Call for a Genuine 
and Lasting Ceasefire 
A ceasefire in name only 
On 16 May, the temporary ceasefire declared between Lebanon and Israel on 17 April was 
renewed for a second time, following negotiations brokered by the United States. Yet 
hostilities are ongoing, albeit somewhat reduced in intensity and geographic scope, and 
Lebanon continues to face a severe humanitarian emergency. 
The ceasefire agreement did not provide for the withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanese 
territory, and included language permitting Israel to ‘take all necessary measures in self -
defence, at any time, against planned, imminent, or ongoing attacks’. Since its declaration, 
Israeli attacks have continued on a daily basis - targeting the south, the Bekaa valley, and, 
on one occasion, the southern suburbs of Beirut - raising serious concerns for the protection 
of civilians. Over 600 people have been killed in  Lebanon since the ceasefire was declared, 
many of them women, children and emergency responders.1  
Numerous incidents raise serious questions regarding compliance with International 
Humanitarian Law, including the principles of distinction and proportionality. Entire families 
have been hit in airstrikes, with men and women being killed alongside their c hildren and 
grandchildren. Health and 
rescue workers have been 
killed when they arrive at 
attack scenes, continuing the 
trend of ‘double tap’ strikes 
(even triple or quadruple in 
some cases) seen since the 
start of the escalation.  
The psychological impact of 
the ongoing hostilities cannot 
be underestimated. The fear 
and panic stirred by repeated 
attacks and displacement 
orders are heightened by 
periodic sonic booms and the 
 
1 According to Lebanese MoPH data: this figure includes bodies recovered since 17 April, people reported missing and later 
confirmed dead, and people who died from previously sustained injuries 
Damage caused by an airstrike in Beirut © Action Against Hunger
Attacks and Displacement Continue in Lebanon | Page 2 
near-constant sound of overhead drones throughout the country’s airspace. Meanwhile a 
generation of children and young people have seen their education disrupted by the 
conversion of public schools into shelters, for the second time in two years. 
The situation within the Israeli -defined military -zone in southern Lebanon is particularly 
concerning. Multiple villages have been completely destroyed, while repeated 
displacement orders, military presence and access restrictions continue to prevent people 
from returning. Remaining communities face critical disruptions to essential supplies and 
services. According to the National Centre for Scientific Research, over 10,000 housing units 
have been damaged or destroyed since the ceasefire was declared. Human itarian actors 
continue to operate in the area but access is increasingly challenging.   
Meanwhile Hezbollah has, after an initial pause, resumed cross -border attacks into 
northern Israel, reportedly killing seven Israeli soldiers and one civilian contractor.2 For both 
parties to this conflict, this has become a ceasefire in name only. 
A deepening humanitarian crisis 
More than 3,000 people have been killed in Lebanon since the escalation began on 2 March, 
including over 290 women, 200 children and 100 health workers, while more than 9,000 have 
been injured, according to Lebanon’s Ministry of Public Health. One million people remain 
internally displaced, residing in collective shelters across the country, unstable rented 
accommodation, with host families or in informal settings such as cars, garages and public 
spaces. 
Amid the insecurity, NGOs 
continue to respond to the 
needs of displaced 
populations who cannot 
return home due to 
ongoing insecurity and 
widespread destruction. 
Numbers of displaced 
persons are now rising, not 
falling, as families attempt 
to return and are forced to 
flee yet again. Inside and 
outside shelters there is 
an urgent need for basic 
 
2 https://www.timesofisrael.com/liveblog_entry/idf-says-infantry-platoon-commander-killed-by-hezbollah-drone-in-southern-lebanon/ 
Displaced children at a collective shelter, Saida © World Vision
Attacks and Displacement Continue in Lebanon | Page 3 
supplies, such as food, safe water, medicine and hygiene items. NGOs are operating mobile 
clinics to deliver emergency healthcare, and providing nutrition and psychosocial support 
services, notably for pregnant women, new mothers and young children. Shelters are being 
urgently rehabilitated to improve water and sanitation facilities and enhance privacy and 
protection for the vulnerable. But in a strained funding climate, needs far outstrip available 
resources, and continue to increase with no end to the displacement in sight.  
Call to action 
The trend of expanding and intensifying violence must not be allowed to continue. Civilians 
at the centre of this crisis have suffered for too long: they must be enabled to return home 
safely and securely, to begin rebuilding their lives. 
International, National and Local NGOs in Lebanon call on all parties to the conflict to: 
• Cease immediately all attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure, and commit to 
a genuine and permanent end to hostilities; 
• Ensure safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access to all affected communities, 
particularly in southern Lebanon; 
• Facilitate the safe, voluntary and dignified return of displaced communities by 
creating the conditions necessary for return, including the removal of military 
personnel and assets from civilian areas. 
We call on the international community to: 
• Deploy all available diplomatic levers to secure and sustain a full and permanent 
ceasefire; 
• Support independent, impartial investigations into reported violations of 
International Humanitarian Law, including attacks on civilians, healthcare, and 
civilian infrastructure, and grave violations against children.  
• Urgently mobilise sustained and flexible funding to enable the humanitarian 
community both to meet immediate needs and to support early recovery and 
reconstruction. 
 
 
21 May 2026
Attacks and Displacement Continue in Lebanon | Page 4 
 
  
The Lebanon Humanitarian INGO Forum (LHIF) is an informal and independent 
coordinating body comprising 73 international NGOs (INGOs) who are working to address 
the needs of vulnerable individuals, families, and communities throughout Lebanon.  
This statement reflects the endorsement of a majority of LHIF members.  
 
The Lebanon Humanitarian and Development NGOs Forum (LHDF) is an independent 
network of over 90 local and national NGOs (LNGOs) working across Lebanon to respond 
to humanitarian needs, advance development, and strengthen community resilience. 
LHDF provides a platform for coordination, joint advocacy, and collective action, ensuring 
that local actors have a strong, unified voice in decision -making at national, regional, and 
global levels. 
 
For questions, please contact inquiries@lhif.org, lngos.forum@gmail.com
Attacks and Displacement Continue in Lebanon | Page 5 
Member organisations of the Lebanon Humanitarian INGO Forum (LHIF): 
 
Acted 
Action Against Hunger 
Action Aid 
Anera 
Arche Nova 
ARCS Culture Solidali 
Asmae - Association Soeur Emmanuelle 
AVSI 
Bioforce 
CAFOD 
Caritas Austria 
Caritas Germany 
Caritas Switzerland 
Catholic Relief Services  
CESVI 
Comitato Internazionale per lo Sviluppo 
dei Popoli  
Clovek v Ohrozeni 
Concern Worldwide 
COOPI 
Corus 
Danmission 
DanChurchAid Lebanon  
Danish Refugee Council  
Dorcas Aid International 
Fondation Mérieux 
HEKS/EPER 
HelpAge International 
Humanity & Inclusion 
Humedica 
IECD 
INSO 
INTERSOS 
Islamic Relief Worldwide, Lebanon  
Johanniter International Assistance 
JRS Lebanon 
Jusoor 
La Chaîne de l'Espoir 
Legal Action Worldwide  
Malteser International 
Médecins du Monde 
Mennonite Central Committee 
Mercy Corps 
Mines Advisory Group 
Norwegian Church Aid  
Norwegian People’s Aid 
Norwegian Refugee Council  
Oxfam in Lebanon 
Plan International Lebanon 
Première Urgence Internationale 
Relief International 
Right to Play  
SAMS 
Save the Children 
Search for Common Ground  
Secours Islamique France  
Solidarités International 
Swisscontact 
Taawon 
Tearfund UK  
Terre des hommes Italy 
Terre des hommes Lausanne 
Trocaire 
Un Ponte Per  
War Child Holland 
Welthungerhilfe  
WeWorld