Countries around the world, including Iran, the US and Cuba, have committed to help with rescue efforts in 
Venezuela
 after deadly twin earthquakes hit the country.
On the evening of 24 June, Venezuela was rocked by 
two back-to-back earthquakes
 measuring 7.2 and 7.5 on the Richter scale that killed at least 164 people, injured close to 1,000 more, and caused significant damage to the capital Caracas, as well as areas across the north of the country.
Tommaso Della Longa, spokesman for the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, said the earthquake comes after a host of challenges that Venezuela has already faced, adding a complexity to how the country is able to respond to this disaster.
He said that, in the recent past, an economic crisis, flooding and a number of health issues had affected the country. “We are talking about a system that in some parts was already, if not weak, then under several constraints and challenges,” he said. “If you look at the number of injuries, just to give an example, that would overwhelm any health system.”
Marco Rubio, US secretary of state said on Thursday that the US will provide a “whole-of-government” response. “It’ll be big, it’ll be fast, and it’ll be effective,” he told reporters during a visit to Bahrain, saying the Department of Defence would play a “big logistical role”.
Latin American countries, including Mexico, Brazil, El Salvador, Ecuador, the Dominican Republic and Cuba, also offered solidarity and help.
Cuban health workers were already on the scene, said foreign minister Bruno Rodríguez, and were “fully mobilised and providing medical services to the affected population”.
The Netherlands said it would allocate about €2m (£1.72m) to send a rescue team with workers, dogs and equipment. Both Spain and France said they would send dozens of rescuers, and Germany promised six military transport planes. They were joined by Switzerland, which promised emergency teams and rescue dogs.
Esmaeil Baqaei, Iran’s foreign ministry spokesperson, announced in a statement “Iran’s readiness to provide any assistance required in relief and rescue operations”, while expressing “solidarity with the government and people of Venezuela”.
China also said it was ready to send whatever was needed.
Tom Fletcher, UN humanitarian chief, 
said specialist rescue teams were on their way to Venezuela to help search for survivors.
 He said the “solidarity and practical offers from the region and beyond were superb”.
He added: “The coming days will require a massive collective effort to support the government-led response and help communities … Sustained international support for humanitarian organisations responding on the ground is essential and urgent.”
The earthquake – the strongest since 1900 – sent rescuers and local people clambering in the dark over flattened apartments, hunting for survivors and extracting people from the ruins.
It struck at a time when 
7.9 million people in the country are in need of humanitarian assistance
, amounting to 27.7% of the total population of 28.5 million people, according to the UN. Persistent gaps in basic services – including healthcare, water, education and energy – remain among the most critical needs for vulnerable people.
Jan Egeland, secretary general of the Norwegian Refugee Council, said: “This earthquake will deepen the suffering for millions already in dire need. More than a quarter of the country’s population needed urgent aid even before the earthquakes.”
The humanitarian response plan in Venezuela is drastically underfunded with only $146.9m of the $632.2m having been delivered. The 
2025 humanitarian response plan in Venezuela was just 20% funded
, while the 2024 plan was 28% funded.
Egeland added: “The deep suffering of the crisis-engulfed people in Venezuela has been neglected for too long … Donors must urgently step up support as this earthquake has become a catastrophe on top of a crisis. There can be no delay in this support.”