Home
                    


 







                        Europe
                    








Live


Live: Russia launches deadly barrage on Kyiv region on eve of NATO summit






Issued on: 
06/07/2026 - 04:48
Modified: 
06/07/2026 - 04:48
 

















                Smoke from an explosion rises during a Russian missile strike on the Ukrainian capital of Kyiv on July 6, 2026, amid the Russian invasion in Ukraine        © Sergei SUPINSKY, AFP    
 









                                Russia struck Ukraine's Kyiv region with ballistic missiles on Monday, killing at least eight people and wounding dozens, authorities said, on the eve of a NATO summit in Turkey. The assault was the second on the capital and its surroundings in less than a week and came as both sides increased long-range attacks, underlining the growing reach of the war more than four years after Russia launched its full-scale invasion.  Follow our liveblog for the latest developments.            




 
 








06/07/2026 - 04:45
Russia launches deadly barrage on Kyiv region on eve of NATO summit


Russia struck Ukraine's Kyiv region with ballistic missiles on Monday, killing at least eight people and wounding dozens, authorities said, on the eve of a NATO summit in Turkey.
The assault was the second on the capital and its surroundings in less than a week and came as both sides increased long-range attacks, underlining the growing reach of the war more than four years after Russia launched its full-scale invasion.
US President Donald Trump and Ukraine's Volodymyr Zelensky are expected to discuss the war on the sidelines of the summit in the Turkish capital Ankara, which begins Tuesday.
After that, Trump plans to speak with Russian leader Vladimir Putin as Washington seeks to revive stalled peace efforts.






06/07/2026 - 03:58
Three dead in Russian attack on Kyiv, local official says


An ⁠mass ​overnight ​Russian attack ​on Ukrainian ‌capital ⁠Kyiv ‌has ⁠killed three people, ​Tymur ‌Tkachenko,
head ‌of ​the city's military administration, ​said ​on ​Telegram
.






06/07/2026 - 03:45






06/07/2026 - 03:14
Russia launches new barrage on Kyiv region, wounds eight


Russia attacked Kyiv's capital region with ballistic missiles on Monday, sparking fires and wounding at least eight people, authorities said after the foes traded overnight strikes.
The assault was the second on Kyiv and its surroundings in less than a week and came as both sides increased long-range attacks, underlining the growing reach of the conflict more than four years after Russia invaded.
An AFP journalist in Kyiv heard more than 10 explosions during a ballistic missile alert early Monday. Around 30 minutes later, AFP journalists saw several flashes in the sky as another series of blasts rang out.
"The enemy is striking with ballistic missiles," Tymur Tkachenko, the head of the Ukrainian capital's military administration, wrote on Telegram.
Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko stated that air defences were in operation and urged people to remain in shelters.
"Sadly, we have injuries as a result of another enemy attack on Kyiv region," Mykola Kalashnyk, the regional governor said on Telegram.








(FRANCE 24 with AP, AFP and Reuters)












Keywords for this article