Somalia: Humanitarian Situation Update, April 2026 | 1 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
This report is produced by OCHA Somalia in collaboration with humanitarian partners. It provides information on the humanitarian situation across 
Somalia in Mayl 2026.  
 
HIGHLIGHTS 
• Six million people are facing high levels of acute food 
insecurity between April and June, including 1.9 million 
in emergency. Nearly 1.88 million children are 
expected to need treatment for acute malnutrition; 
42,000 more than previously projected. 
 
• Buurhakaba district in Bay region is facing the risk of 
famine if a worst-case scenario develops where the 
current April to June rains fail, food prices continue to 
rise sharply, and assistance is not scaled up.  
 
• Assistance is being scaled up amidst funding 
constraints. The Emergency Relief Coordinator is 
releasing US$10M from the UN’s Emergency Fund to 
reach 640,000 people with lifesaving food, nutrition, 
health and water assistance. 
 
• The 2026 Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan is 
just 19.8 per cent funded. Due to low funding, 577,000 
people were reached from January to April against a 
target of 2.43 million — about 24 per cent coverage. 
 
• Disease outbreaks continue to be reported across 
Somalia, with increasing cases of diphtheria reported in 
Banadir region and Galmudug State, and Acute Watery Diarrhoea (AWD)/cholera and measles outbreaks in 
South West and Hirshabelle States. 
 
KEY FIGURES  
6M 
People facing acute 
food insecurity in 
April and May. 
1.88M 
Children requiring 
treatment for acute 
malnutrition in 2026.  
24% 
People reached against 
target (Jan-April) - 577K 
against 2.43M. 
102K 
People in IPC Phase 3 
and above in 
Buurhakaba district. 
19.8% 
Funding received for 
2026 HNRP (US$169M 
of $852 requested). 
 
Risk of famine in Bay region as food insecurity worsens 
Six million people in Somalia — 31 per cent of the analysed population — are facing high levels of acute food insecurity 
(IPC Phase 3 or above) between April and June 2026, including 1.9 million in Emergency (IPC Phase 4), according to 
the updated April–June 2026 2026 IPC integrated food insecurity and acute malnutrition analysis  for Somalia. Nearly 
1.88 million children are expected to require treatment for acute malnutrition in 2026 — 42,000 more than previously 
projected. The situation is particularly concerning in Buurhakaba district, Bay region, where agropastoral livelihoods 
SOMALIA  
Monthly Humanitarian Update 
May 2026 
Source: IPC
Somalia: Humanitarian Situation Update, April 2026 | 2 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
face the risk of famine if a worst-case scenario 
develops in which the April to June rains fail, 
food prices continue to rise sharply, and 
humanitarian assistance is not scaled up to 
reach the most vulnerable people. About 
102,000 people are in IPC Phase 3 and above in 
the district, with more than 20 per cent facing 
IPC Phase 4 (Emergency). Nearly 40 per cent of 
children under five are acutely malnourished. 
Partners warn that if the below-average April–
June rains end early or dry spells occur during 
critical crop development stages in May and 
June, famine thresholds may be crossed within 
two to three months. 
 
Humanitarian assistance scaled up amidst 
funding constraints 
The UN Emergency Relief Coordinator (ERC) 
Tom Fletcher is releasing US$10M from UN's 
Emergency Fund {CERF), noting that the window 
to prevent famine is short. The funding will provide lifesaving food, nutrition, health and water assistance to 640,000 
people. Already, the  Somalia Humanitarian Fund is processing an allocation of US$2 million to scale up  ongoing 
interventions to reduce the risk of Buurhakaba sliding into famine conditions. On 19 May, the Somalia Disaster 
Management Agency (SoDMA) distributed food assistance to 2,500 vulnerable households in Burhakaba, providing 
essential food packages to support food-insecure communities. 
 
Access to essential water and sanitation services in Buurhakaba is extremely limited, with only 13 per cent of 
households having access to safe drinking water and 2.2 per cent having access to improved sanitation facilities.   
Following a joint mission by UNICEF, Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH), Health and Nutrition teams, and 
representatives from the authorities to Buurhakaba, significant gaps were identified in water, nutrition, and health 
service delivery, particularly in areas outside the district centre. Findings indicate persistently high levels of acute 
malnutrition, poor water quality, and affordability challenges, while an estimated 97 priority villages continue to receive 
little or no humanitarian assistance. UNICEF and partners have distributed 400 hygiene kits to vulnerable households 
in displacement settlements, with an additional 2,000 kits planned. Chlorine supplies have been dispatched to support 
water treatment activities, and training provided to local water operators to improve water quality management. 
Nutrition interventions are being undertaken including strengthened warehouse management, and technical mentoring 
for frontline workers. Identified priority actions include rehabilitating the Buurhakaba water system, expanding 
stabilisation centre capacity, ensuring uninterrupted supplies of nutrition commodities, increasing frontline staffing, 
and enhancing referral and supply chain management systems. 
 
Low funding constraining response 
Humanitarian assistance remains the critical lifeline for saving lives and livelihoods and addressing acute food 
insecurity and malnutrition in Somalia, but the situation has been exacerbated by a major reduction in services and 
assistance due to severe funding constraints. As of 12 June, the 2026 Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan is just 
19.8 per cent funded. From January to April, humanitarian actors reached just over 577,000 people against a target of 
2.43 million — about 24 per cent coverage. In 21 priority districts, 371,839 people were reached against 1.6 million 
targeted; with 15 of the districts at below 25 per cent inter-cluster coverage and one with no response. At the same 
time, the ripple effects of conflict in the Middle East are leading to increased vulnerability. Food prices — linked to fuel 
price increases and maritime supply chain disruptions — have risen by up to 20 per cent, weakening household 
purchasing power. 
 
Humanitarian and Government officials led by the Humanitarian 
Coordinator George Conway (white shirt) visiting Buurhakaba in 
May. Photo: OCHA/René Nijenhuis.
Somalia: Humanitarian Situation Update, April 2026 | 3 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
Climate shocks exacerbating humanitarian conditions 
Uneven rainfall, flooding, and access constraints are 
worsening humanitarian conditions, especially in 
northern regions, contributing to water shortages, poor 
pasture conditions, and infrastructure damage. 
Disrupted transport routes and rising commodity pr ices 
are further increasing vulnerabilities , underscoring the 
need for timely support and improved access. In Sanaag, 
Togdheer, and parts of Woqooyi Galbeed, uneven rainfall 
has led to widespread water shortages and poor pasture 
conditions. At the same time, heavy rains and flooding 
have caused significant damage to critical infrastructure, 
including th e main tarmac road linking Bossaso and 
Garowe. Flash floods along key corridors, particularly in 
Buraan, Ceel Daahir, and Karin, have rendered roads 
impassable and constrained movement. 
According to FAO’s Famine Early Warning Systems 
Network (FewsNet), food security outcomes are 
expected to vary in agropastoral and riverine areas of 
southern Somalia based on rainfall performance, crop 
prospects, and insecurity. Emergency outcomes are 
projected between May and September in agropastoral 
areas of Hiraan region due to widespread crop failure and 
insecurity. In central and northern areas, the April to June 
rains have been exceptionally poor.  Projections show 
that acute food insecurity and malnutrition will likely 
remain very high through 2026, incl uding due to the 
increased risk of flooding associated with an anticipated 
El Niño later in the year. Life -saving humanitarian 
assistance needs to be scaled up and sustained urgently, 
especially in hotspot areas. 
Previous drought conditions 
In 2025, a prolonged dry spell triggered severe drought conditions in northern and eastern regions. The situation was 
worsened by the poor performance of the October to December rains, marking the fourth consecutive season of no rain 
or below-normal rainfall in many of the affected areas. The drought affected more than 5 million people, including more 
than 500,000 newly displaced people, largely pastoral and agro-pastoral households that were forced to move in search 
of water, food, and pasture. Losses of l ivestock critically undermined coping capacities and eroded resilience, while 
widespread crop failure was reported. The Shabelle and Juba river levels dropped sharply or dried up in some areas, 
severely constraining water availability. By April, the price of a 200 -litre water barrel had doubled or tripled in many 
districts, at least 280 boreholes nationwide were non -functional, and 829 schools had been affected, with 358 closed 
and 471 operating under severe constraints or at risk of closure, affecting abou t 189,000 children. 
 
Disease burden increasing as response dwindles 
Disease outbreaks continue to present serious public health risks across multiple regions, with increasing cases of 
diphtheria reported in Banadir region and Galmudug, alongside persistent Acute Watery Diarrhoea (AWD)/cholera and 
measles outbreaks in South West and Hirshabelle States. Children and other vulnerable groups remain the most affected, 
with transmission driven by low vaccination coverage, weak health systems, poor water and sanitation conditions, and 
limited diagnostic and treatment capacity. Disease incidence is increasing at a time when health services are dwindling.
Somalia: Humanitarian Situation Update, April 2026 | 4 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
More than 500 health and nutrition facilities have 
been closed across the country due to lack of 
funding, with disease outbreaks not being 
controlled and mortality risks rising. Total 
measles cases across Somalia doubled during 
January to March 2026 compar ed to the first 
quarter of 2025, particularly impacting vulnerable 
and acutely malnourished children 
In Banadir, diphtheria is a major health concern, 
with 724 cumulative cases and 25 deaths 
recorded since early 2026. The region carries the 
highest national burden, with transmission 
concentrated in densely populated and 
vulnerable areas. Response efforts are 
constrained by shortages of Diphtheria Antitoxin, 
limited laboratory capacity, and gaps in 
surveillance, underscoring the need to strengthen 
vaccination, early detection, and community 
awareness.  
In Galmudug, ten suspected diphtheria cases were reported in Galgaduud in the week ending 24 May, most of them in 
Guri Ceel. Since the start of 2026, 275 cases and four deaths have been recorded, with most cases reported from hard -
to-reach areas with low immunisation coverage. Shortages of Diphtheria Antitoxin and laboratory reagents continue to 
limit effective outbreak control. In South West, disease outbreaks continue to affect vulnerable populations, particularly 
children under five, with 138 suspected AWD/cholera cases, 369 suspected measles cases, and 11 suspected diphtheria 
cases reported across several districts this year. Ongoing transmission has been confirmed, while limited diagnostic 
capacity continues to hamper timely response. The outbreak pattern reflects inadequate WASH services, low vaccination 
coverage, and weak health system capacity. 
Story: Acute malnutrition talking a toll on children in Buurhakaba 
Acute malnutrition levels have worsened substantially in Buurhakaba district, Bay region, 
driven by the compounding impacts of poor food consumption, high disease incidence, 
and reduced access to nutrition and health services. The convergence of extreme 
malnutrition prevalence, high levels of food insecurity, high disease burden, and severely 
constrained access to safe water and sanitation indicates a heightened risk of excess 
morbidity and mortality. The situation has been exacerbated by sharply reduced a ccess 
to health and nutrition services in rural areas, with the number of treatment sites falling 
from 16 in 2024 to three by April 2026. 
 
OCHA visited the Nutrition Stabilisation Centre at Buurhakaba District Hospital and found 
Mohamed Abdi Nurow, a 2 -year-old boy from Dhafuur village, who was admitted on 7 
June due to severe acute malnutrition with complications. He was brought to the hospital 
by his mother , Habiibo . “A prolonged drought affected our agricultural activities, 
significantly impacting our family livelihood,” said Habiibo. “The loss of income and food 
production ultimately led to Mohamed’s malnutrition and deteriorating health condition.” 
 
Another child, Salma Siidaw Ali, 22 months old, was admitted on 4 June with severe acute malnutrition accompanied by 
medical complications, requiring inpatient therapeutic care. Salma comes from a highly vulnerable household with 
limited financial resources. “I struggle to meet basic needs and rely on irregular , unstable income,” her mother, Khadijo 
Abdi, said. “Poverty, food insecurity, and lack of a reliable income source have placed my household at high risk, leading 
to Salma’s deteriorating nutritional condition and complications.”  
The ERC Tom Fletcher (white shirt) visiting a nutrition center in 
Mogadishu in April. Photo: OCHA/Ayub Ahmed 
Mohamed  and his mother at 
the centre. Photo: 
OCHA/Guled Issa.
Somalia: Humanitarian Situation Update, April 2026 | 5 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
 
Mohamed Omar, a physician at the facility, reported a rise in admissions of children with Severe Acute Malnutrition 
(SAM) and complications over the past two months, mostly from rural villages. From 1 January to 10 June, a total of 295 
cases of Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) with complications were admitted to the centre , of which 65 per cent were  
recorded between April and 10 June, including four deaths. 
 
Story: Rebuilding family livelihood in Buurhakaba 
Shanbaqol Ibrahim Aliyow, a 40 -year-old mother of five 
children — four girls and one boy — lives in Misaare 
displacement camp in Buurhakaba. In 2024, s he was 
displaced from her village, also called Misaare, located 
12 kilometres from Buurhakaba, after prolonged 
hardship and the loss of livelihood opportunities left her 
family unable to meet their basic needs. 
Before displacement, Shanbaqol’s family depended on 
menial work, including working on other people’s farms 
and keeping livestock. They owned 10 goats and five 
sheep, which provided an important source of food and 
income. However, prolonged drought forced Shanbaqol 
to sell some of her livestock to cover household 
expenses, while others died due to the harsh conditions. 
The family arrived at the displacement site after a nine-
hour journey by vehicle, with very limited resources. While the journey was difficult and emotionally exhausting, life at 
the displacement site brought new challenges. Shanbaqol struggled to provide for her children. To survive, she borrowed 
money from relatives, neighbours, and local shopkeepers, but the growing debt soon became difficult to repay.  
Registered for assistance 
In January 2026, a significant development occurred when Shanbaqol was selected  and registered to receive assistance 
through the ECHO-funded Drought Response Activation Project. She received US$100 per month for three consecutive 
months, enabling her to meet urgent household needs and begin paying off her debts.  “Despite the hardships we faced, 
I never stopped hoping for a better future for my children,” she said. “Every day, I worried about how I would provide food 
and basic necessities for my children. When I received the cash, my situation started to change.”  
In partnership with Save the Children, national partner GREDO is implementing a three-month drought response project 
through the Somalia Cash Consortium in Buurhakaba and Qansaxdheere districts. The project provides multipurpose 
cash assistance for 1,000 newly displaced and accessible households affected by the crisis. 
“I used part of the money to pay debts, purchase food, and invest in buying seven goats,” Shanbaqol said. “The goats 
have become an important asset for my family. They give me hope for the future and will help me to become self-reliant 
again. I sincerely thank GREDO and the donors for supporting me and my children during one of the most difficult periods 
of our lives.” For Shanbaqol, the cash assistance was more than immediate relief — it was an opportunity to rebuild her 
livelihood, restore hope, and create a more secure future for her children. 
 
 
Shanbaqol taking care of her goats at Misaare displacement 
site in Buurhakaba. Photo: GREDO. 
For further information, please contact:   
Ogoso, Erich Opolot | Public Information Officer, OCHA Somalia | ogoso@un.org | Tel. +254 720766587 
Ayub Ahmed | Public Information Officer, OCHA Somalia | ayub.ahmed@un.org  | Tel. +252 619150463 
   
 
OCHA public information products are available at www.ochasomalia.org | 
www.unocha.org/somalia | www.reliefweb.int