The Philippines’ defense chief said today that he would continue to do his duty and defend the country’s interests in the South China Sea, a day after Beijing sanctioned him for his “irresponsible remarks” about China’s maritime conduct.


In a statement, Gilberto Teodoro Jr. 
shrugged off the Chinese sanctions
, which prevent him and his immediate family from traveling to the Chinese mainland, Hong Kong, or Macao.


“That is their right. That is truly what they do to those who speak the truth against their deception. Their own countrymen and the others under their control suffer far worse,” Teodoro stated. “I will just keep doing my duty and uphold our nation in the face of the wickedness they are committing here and even in our seas.”


The Philippines’ Department of Foreign Affairs 
responded
 to the announcement by stating that China has a “sovereign prerogative” to impose sanctions, but that Manila “views it as an unfriendly act that further complicates the bilateral relations.”


It added, “Such measures do not contribute to building mutual trust, managing differences responsibly, or creating the conditions necessary for constructive engagement between our two countries.”


His comments came a day after China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
announced the imposition of sanctions
 against Teodoro, accusing the Philippine defense chief of having “repeatedly made irresponsible remarks on China.”


“To uphold China’s sovereignty, security, and development interests, China has decided to prohibit Gilberto Teodoro Jr. and his spouse and child from entering the Chinese mainland, Hong Kong, and Macao,” the Ministry said in a statement.


The sanction also bars organizations and individuals in China from engaging in transactions, cooperation, or other activities with Teodoro and his family.


The Chinese statement did not specify what comments it had in mind, but it can easily be imagined. Since Teodoro took up his post in mid-2023, the Philippines has waged a transparency campaign intended to publicize the frequent Chinese incursions into the Philippines’ exclusive economic zone (EEZ) in the South China Sea.


This has broadcast to the world footage of a string of confrontations between the two nations’ coast guards, which have seen China Coast Guard patrol ships ramming and hitting Philippine vessels with high-pressure water cannons.


Teodoro has also led efforts to deepen Manila’s defense and security cooperation with the United States, the country’s long-standing security ally, and other core partners, including Australia, Japan, Canada, France, and New Zealand.


All the while, he has not minced words when criticizing China’s maritime behavior in the South China Sea. The Associated Press cited one occasion last year when Teodoro 
described
 China’s expansive claims to the vital waterway as “the biggest fiction and lie.” He said that they were a result of the “abusive ways” of Chinese leader Xi Jinping and stated that they “would possibly destroy his leadership of his party in China and the goodwill that was nurtured by his predecessors.”


Earlier this week, the Philippines 
lodged a formal complaint
 with China after discovering a floating structure at the disputed Scarborough Shoal in the South China Sea. Manila’s National Task Force for the West Philippine Sea said in a 
statement
 that the floating platform measured about six meters by six meters and appeared to have an antenna. Philippine officials believe that the structure is being used to facilitate unauthorized scientific research at the atoll, which lies within the Philippines’ EEZ but has been under Chinese control since 2012.


The sanctions elevate Teodoro into the small club of foreign officials who have been sanctioned by Beijing for actions it argues violate its core interests. This includes U.S. and European officials, as well as 
a former Philippine senator
, Francis Tolentino, who authored two bills asserting the country’s maritime rights over disputed areas of the South China Sea. The bills were 
signed into law
 by President Ferdinand Marcos Jr. in November 2024.