Good morning. The US military 
carried out strikes on Iran for a second day
, hours after Donald Trump said an interim agreement to end the war was “over”. Iranian state media reported explosions in the port city of Bandar Abbas in the strait of Hormuz; in Sirik, another southern coastal city; and the south-western Bushehr province, home to Iran’s nuclear power plant complex. US Central Command confirmed the strikes.
On Tuesday, three cargo ships ⁠transiting the strait of Hormuz were attacked, leading to the most extensive exchange of fire between the two sides since the interim deal was signed last month. At the Nato summit in Ankara on Wednesday, the US president said: “Anything that happens is going to happen very fast” and that the latest strikes would not result in “long-term” military action. “They are behaving very badly,” Trump said, accusing Iran of launching drones and a missile at ships.




What are the economic impacts of the renewed hostilities?
 
US stock markets fell
 on Wednesday, and Brent crude, the global benchmark for oil prices, jumped more than 5% to crest $80 a barrel. The International Monetary Fund lowered its global economic growth forecast to 3%, citing conflict in the Middle East. Jorge León, the head of geopolitical analysis at Rystad Energy, 
said
: “Tanker traffic through the strait of Hormuz has essentially stopped, which tells you more about risk perception right now than any statement from Washington or Tehran.”


Graham Platner ends Maine Senate campaign after sexual assault allegation
Graham Platner has been dogged by controversy since entering the Senate contest. 
 Photograph: Robert F Bukaty/AP
Graham Platner, the Democratic nominee for the US Senate in Maine, 
is suspending his campaign
 following sexual assault allegations. Platner announced his decision in an 11-minute video in which he angrily accused the Democratic establishment and corporate media of acting “as judge, jury and executioner”. In the video, Platner vehemently stood by his assertion that the accusations were “not remotely true”.
The oyster farmer and marine veteran – whose populist platform packed town halls and earned support from progressive stars such as Bernie Sanders – has been dogged by controversy since entering the Senate contest, including over his conduct in past romantic relationships, his social media history and a since-removed tattoo of a Nazi symbol. In Washington, our bureau chief, David Smith, says the debacle puts Democrats in 
grave danger of blowing it in the midterms
.




Who could replace Platner?
 Maine Democrats have until 27 July to select a replacement to face Susan Collins in a race widely seen as pivotal to control of the Senate. The state party said it would hold a nominating convention to pick a new candidate. Troy Jackson, Janet Mills, Valli Geiger and Shenna Bellows are among the names in the frame – with Joseph Gedeon profiling them and assessing their prospects 
in this piece
.


‘He did not deserve to die’: family of man fatally shot by ICE agent speaks out
The Salgado family address the media.
 Photograph: David J Phillip/AP
The family of a Mexican immigrant who was fatally shot by a federal immigration agent in Texas on Tuesday 
called for an independent investigation
 into his killing, as questions swirl around federal officials’ claims and lack of transparency.
Salgado, 52, was 
shot and killed
 by an Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) official while on his way to work at a construction site on Tuesday morning. The department accused Salgado of having “weaponized his vehicle” to run over an ICE official, “resulting in our officer firing his weapon in self-defense”. Salgado’s family said he was a “hardworking family man”, had lived in the US for more than 30 years and was in the process of obtaining his work permit.




What are the family asking for?
 The Department of Homeland Security announced that its inspector general’s office and the FBI were investigating the events, but Salgado’s family, lawmakers and officials are calling for local Houston officials to investigate independently. The Houston mayor’s office stopped short of announcing an independent investigation, saying city officials do not hold jurisdiction over federal law enforcement matters.


In other news …
Trump wants the US supreme court to reconsider its ruling that the 14th amendment guarantees birthright citizenship. 
 Photograph: Marek Ladzinski/Zuma Press Wire/Shutterstock




Trump is to ask the US supreme court to 
reconsider the birthright citizenship ruling
 in the light of a hospital in Texas advertising its services to expectant mothers in Mexico.




A photo of a bound Palestinian detainee 
corroborates Israeli torture reports
, say rights groups. The image of a man in underwear, blindfolded and bound to an iron rod has been widely shared on social media.




The French far-right leader Marine Le Pen has 
launched her presidential campaign
 after a decision by a court of appeal shortened her ban on running for office, allowing her to take part in the 2027 vote.




Bonnie Tyler, the 80s pop legend known for Total Eclipse of the Heart
, 
has died aged 75
.
 Her family said she unexpectedly passed away in hospital in Portugal as a result of the illness for which she was receiving treatment.


Stat of the day: US judge orders release of $5.8m Trump owes E Jean Carroll after court loss
Carroll leaves Manhattan federal court at the end of her civil defamation case against Trump. 
 Photograph: Michael M Santiago/Getty Images
A Manhattan federal court judge has 
ordered the release
 of the more than $5m Donald Trump owes E Jean Carroll after her successful 2023 sexual abuse and defamation case against him. Less than an hour after the judge issued his order, Trump filed paperwork indicating he was appealing against the decision.
The Filter recommends: Nine travel upgrades we rely on to survive long flights
Comfortable clothes and compression socks help long flights feel more restorative. 
 Photograph: Colin Anderson/Getty Images/Blend Images
Long-haul travel can be a stressful and uncomfortable experience, even if you are being treated to business class. Marissa Miller presents 
nine essentials for comfort
, sleep and entertainment to help your flight feel restorative.
Don’t miss this: Beat legend, ‘boy lover’: how should we reckon with Allen Ginsberg’s complex legacy?
The keeper of Ginsberg’s estate examines his poetic genius and controversial views. 
 Illustration: Guardian Design / Getty Images
As a series of star-studded events celebrates Ginsberg’s centennial, 
Alexander Cheves examines
 how we reckon with the controversial and provocative views of the iconic writer.
… or this: ‘They said: wear angelic white’ – British women who accused US airman of rape tell of military trial
The UK has ceded authority to a US court martial in what appear to be criminal cases involving US military personnel. 
 Illustration: Guardian Design/The Texas Public Sex Offender Website / Getty
In interviews with the Guardian
, two survivors of sexual assault in the UK speak of their allegations against a US airman, and their traumatic experience of giving evidence against him at a US court martial, in yet another case where it is unclear why authorities in the UK are ceding jurisdiction to the US military in what appear to be criminal cases.
Climate check: Western Europe records hottest
 June as heatwaves intensify
A resident looks at smoke rising from a wildfire in south-west France. 
 Photograph: Idriss Bigou-Gilles/AFP/Getty Images
Western Europe has been 
scorched by its hottest June on record
, scientists have said, as the UK enters its third heatwave of the year and wildfires ravage France and Spain. Inflamed by carbon pollution, the deadly June heatwave helped push surface air temperatures for the region 3.06C above their average from recent decades.
Last 
thing: Venomous snakes escape breeding farms in southern China during flooding
Children sit outside flood-damaged houses in the village of Liulan, near Hengzhou. 
 Photograph: Greg Baker/AFP/Getty Images
Hundreds of snakes have 
escaped from flooded breeding farms
 in Hengzhou as severe storms continue to batter parts of China. A dramatic video showed residents using dip nets to catch snakes, as local media reported that the escapees included king ratsnakes and cobras.
Sign up
Sign up for the US morning briefing
First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, 
subscribe now
.
Get in touch
If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email 
newsletters@theguardian.com