Dhaka, 11 July 2026 - The United Nations World Food Programme (WFP) has activated its Anticipatory Action (AA) and Shock-Responsive Social Protection (SRSP) response for communities facing severe flooding in Bandarban district of the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT).


Under WFP's Anticipatory Action programme, humanitarian assistance is provided before a disaster strikes, based on weather forecasts and pre-agreed triggers. As part of this response, WFP transferred BDT 5,000 through mobile financial services to vulnerable households identified as being at heightened risk of flooding. In parallel, WFP activated its Shock-Responsive Social Protection mechanism, providing emergency cash top-ups to vulnerable households enrolled in government social protection programmes.


In total, more than 15,600 households (75,000 people) in Bandarban Sadar and Lama upazilas received cash assistance, which was delivered in partnership with WFP cooperating partner Bolipara Nari Kalyan Somity (BNKS).


The activation comes as persistent heavy rainfall has triggered flooding across the Chittagong Hill Tracts, affecting Bandarban, Rangamati and Khagrachhari districts, with forecasts indicating further rainfall and heightened risks in the days ahead.


"Climate shocks are becoming more frequent and more intense in Bangladesh, making early action more important than ever," said Coco Ushiyama, WFP Representative and Country Director in Bangladesh. "By delivering assistance before families are hit by the worst impacts of flooding, we help them protect their food security, livelihoods and assets. At the same time, by strengthening and leveraging national social protection systems, we can support vulnerable people at scale when crises strike."


Bangladesh is among the countries most vulnerable to climate change. Increasingly frequent and severe floods threaten lives, livelihoods and food security, particularly in disaster-prone areas such as the Chittagong Hill Tracts.


Since 2017, WFP has been implementing Anticipatory Action in Bangladesh under the leadership of the Government of Bangladesh and with the support of a range of partners. Evidence from WFP and its partners shows that, globally, every USD 1 invested in anticipatory action can generate up to USD 7 in avoided losses and additional benefits.


WFP has also been supporting the Government of Bangladesh to strengthen its social protection systems and make them more responsive to climate-related shocks. Through Shock-Responsive Social Protection, existing government programmes can be rapidly expanded during emergencies to provide timely support to vulnerable households before they fall deeper into crisis.


++ END ++


About WFP:


The United Nations World Food Programme is the world’s largest humanitarian organization saving lives in emergencies and using food assistance to build a pathway to peace, stability and prosperity for people recovering from conflict, disasters and the impact of climate change.


Follow us on X @wfp_bangladesh, Facebook @WFPinBangladesh, Instagram @wfp_bangladesh


For more information please contact:


Shamima Nasrin Rima, Communication Associate, WFP Bangladesh

Cell: +880 1313097805, WA +880 1534688581


Email: shamima.rima@wfp.org