US President Donald Trump said that the United States and Iran are "getting a lot closer" to an agreement to end the war in the Middle East.










ADVERTISEMENT














ADVERTISEMENT








Talking to CBS in a phone interview on Saturday, the US president also warned that if the US and Iran do not come to an agreement, there will be "a situation where no country will ever be hit as hard as they're about to be hit."


Earlier, on Saturday, two regional officials and a diplomat, speaking on condition of anonymity, also confirmed that an agreement on a memorandum of understanding aimed at ending the war is within reach.


Iran signalled “narrowing differences” in negotiations with the US after Pakistan’s army chief held more talks in Tehran, and US Secretary of State Marco Rubio told journalists in India that “there’s been some progress made" and “there may be news later today.”


According to the same officials, a final decision on the Pakistan-drafted proposal could come within 48 hours as both sides review it.,


However, both Iran and the US have stuck to their key demands and warned about the risks if attacks resume. Yet, the US has weighed a new round of attacks on the Islamic Republic. 


Iran describes it as a ‘framework agreement' for more talks


Iran state TV quoted Foreign Ministry spokesperson Esmail Baghaei as describing the draft as a “framework agreement". 


“We want this to include the main issues required for ending the imposed war and other issues of essential importance to us. Then, over a reasonable time span, between 30 to 60 days, details are discussed and ultimately a final agreement is reached,” Baghaei added. He said the Strait of Hormuz is among the topics discussed.


The spokesperson also mentioned that the positions have moved closer in recent days. “Over the past week, the trend has been toward narrowing differences. We will have to wait and see what happens over the next three or four days.”


Baghaei stressed that nuclear issues are not part of the current negotiations, as Tehran first seeks to end the war before discussing its nuclear programme that has long been at the heart of international tensions. 


“Our focus at this stage is on ending the war on all fronts, including Lebanon,” Baghaei said, adding that lifting sanctions on Tehran “has explicitly been included in the text and remains our fixed position.”


Meanwhile, Rubio, in New Delhi, said that "even as I speak to you now, there is some work being done. There is a chance that whether it’s later today, tomorrow, in a couple days we may have something to say.” He repeated the US stance that Iran can never have a nuclear weapon and must turn over its highly enriched uranium, and the Strait of Hormuz must be open.


Iran has rebuilt military assets after weeks of war and then a fragile ceasefire, parliament Speaker Mohammad Bagher Qalibaf said after the meeting with Pakistan's Field Marshal Asim Munir, state TV reported. Qalibaf, the lead negotiator in historic face-to-face talks with the US last month, also said the result would be “more crushing and more bitter” than at the start of the war if US President Donald Trump resumes attacks.


Trump: ‘Serious negotiations’ are underway


Trump earlier said he was holding off on a military strike against Iran because “serious negotiations” were underway, and at the request of allies in the Middle East. The US president has repeatedly set deadlines for Tehran and then backed off.


The US and Israel began the war with strikes on 28 February, abruptly ending talks with Iran. Tehran responded by effectively closing the Strait of Hormuz, a crucial route for oil, gas and fertiliser, sending shockwaves through the global economy.


The US then imposed a naval blockade on Iranian ports. Since it began on 13 April, US Central Command says its forces have turned away more than 100 commercial vessels and disabled four.


During his visit to Tehran, Pakistan’s army chief also met Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi, President Masoud Pezeshkian and other senior officials, according to the two officials. They said Islamabad is still trying to organise a second round of direct talks. It was unclear whether he met Brig. Gen. Ahmad Vahidi, head of the Revolutionary Guard, who has become a key figure shaping Iran’s hard line in the negotiations.