South Korea
's military said on Wednesday that it had detained a 
North Korean
 soldier overnight after he crossed near the central section of the inter-Korean border. 


"The military secured one North Korean soldier in the central front Tuesday night and relevant authorities are currently investigating the details," Seoul's Joint Chiefs of Staff said in a message to the media, including Yonhap. 


South Korean news agency Yonhap also reported, without citing a source, that the soldier was believed to wish to defect. 
Why North Korea is now Europe's problem
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that 
supports HTML5 video


How rare are inter-Korean border crossings? 


North and South Korea are separated by a heavily fortified border with a special demarcation area known as the DMZ on either side of the frontier, and 
secondary buffer zones after that
. 


Although tens of thousands of North Koreans have fled south since the peninsula was divided by war in the 1950s, they typically exit via the overland route north to neighboring China. From there they tend to enter a third country such as Thailand before ultimately heading to the South. 


In 2024, the last year for which data has been published by South Korea's Unification Ministry, 236 North Koreans arrived in the South. 


Defections across the land border are very rare, though. Much of the frontier is densely forested, the territory is ridden with landmines, and both states' militaries intensively monitor their respective sides. 


Yonhap reports that the overnight crossing is the first such case of 2026. 


It said there had been four registered cases since the launch of the Lee Jae Myung administration last June. Two took place in July and the most recent in October, 
according to Yonhap
. 


What happens to North Koreans who flee to the South?


New arrivals tend to be handed over to intelligence services for security screening.


South Korea typically grants defectors citizenship once this process is complete, a practice the North sees as an affront. It often speaks of defectors in very harsh terms.


The two Koreas remain technically in a state of frozen war
, having only ever signed an armistice, not a peace deal, following the 1950-53 Korean War.


North Korea gains critical intel by aiding Russia in Ukraine
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that 
supports HTML5 video


Edited by: Rana Taha


Don't let the algorithm hide the news. If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to 
select us as a preferred source on Google
, so you'll always see our verified news first.