Norway is strengthening the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Health Contingencies Fund with a contribution of NOK 50 million following a new outbreak of Ebola in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DR Congo) and Uganda.


– When dangerous diseases break out, every hour counts. We must be able to respond immediately, before the situation escalates. That is why we are now strengthening the WHO Health Contingencies Fund. Stopping outbreaks early saves lives where the crisis occurs and also makes the world safer, said Minister of International Development Åsmund Aukrust.


The fund can release resources within 24 hours. WHO has already disbursed USD 3.9 million to support the response to the Ebola outbreak.


Ebola outbreak with high risk of spread


On 15 May, an Ebola outbreak was confirmed in Ituri Province in north-eastern DR Congo. WHO has declared the outbreak a public health emergency of international concern. The outbreak involves a rare strain of the virus for which there is no approved vaccine or specific treatment.


Conflict, large population movements and weak government control make contact tracing and response efforts challenging, and increase the risk of further spread to other parts of the country and to neighbouring countries.


The severe humanitarian situation in the region, with more than 26 million people facing acute food insecurity, further increases vulnerability. Undernutrition, displacement and weakened health services contribute to a higher risk of infection and increased mortality.


Despite major challenges related to access to affected communities, Congolese health authorities have extensive knowledge and relevant experience in responding to Ebola outbreaks. The African Union’s public health agency, the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC), and WHO have launched a coordinated regional response aimed at breaking the chains of transmission.


– The authorities in DR Congo and neighbouring countries are doing important work to bring the outbreak under control. Cooperation with WHO and Africa CDC is crucial to stopping the spread of the disease and protecting local communities, said Minister of International Development Aukrust.


Several of Norway’s partners are supporting efforts related to contact tracing, laboratory capacity, treatment and community information.


Norway’s long-term partnerships with Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, CEPI, which contributes to the development of new vaccines, and the Pandemic Fund will also be important in the continued response.


Norway is the largest contributor to the WHO Health Contingencies Fund


Norway is one of the largest contributors to the WHO Health Contingencies Fund and accounted for more than 46 per cent of its financing in 2025.


Support for the fund is part of Norway’s broader commitment to health services in humanitarian crises. In 2025, this effort amounted to approximately NOK 657 million and included support to, among others, the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, UN organisations and other humanitarian partners.


Through this engagement, Norway contributes to everything from emergency health care, vaccination, and maternal and child health services to the operation of field hospitals, ambulance services and psychosocial support in crisis- and conflict-affected areas.


WHO’s role in global health emergency preparedness


WHO plays a key role in global health emergency preparedness and response, including through the coordination of health clusters in humanitarian crises, disease outbreak surveillance, and the development of technical guidelines and standards.


The organisation also supports national authorities in preparedness and response efforts and helps strengthen health systems in countries affected by recurrent and complex crises.