Zelenskyy asks Trump, US for help with air defences as Russia continues attacks
Meanwhile, 
Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy has asked the United States for more ammunition for its Patriot air defence systems to counter Russian ballistic missiles,
 according to a letter reviewed by AFP.
US president Donald Trump welcomes Ukranian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy at his Mar-a-Lago residence in Palm Beach, Florida in December last year.
 Photograph: Jim Watson/AFP/Getty Images
In the letter, dated 26 May and addressed to US president 
Donald Trump
, Zelensky asked the US to “
help us secure this vital tool of protection against Russian terror – Patriot missiles PAC-3 and additional systems –
 to stop Russian ballistic missiles and other Russian missile attacks.”
Reuters said the letter, directed also to the US Congress, calls for help addressing the critical lack of air defence missiles in 
Ukraine
, which is 
particularly acute as Russia threatens more strikes on the country.
Key events
Show key events only
Please turn on JavaScript to use this feature
Hungarian MPs vote to remain member of ICC, overturning decision made by Orbán
European community affairs correspondent
Meanwhile, 
lawmakers in Hungary have voted overwhelmingly for the country to remain a member of the international criminal court, reversing a decision made by the previous government of Viktor Orbán.
Péter Magyar said Hungary would not join China, Israel, Russia and the US in refusing to recognise the ICC.
 Photograph: Bernadett Szabó/Reuters
Wednesday’s vote came 
days before the country was poised to become the only EU member state not to recognise the jurisdiction of the global tribunal,
 which aims to prosecute those accused of war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity.
In April last year, 
Orbán 
announced that Hungary
 would begin the process of pulling out of what he decried as a “political court”.
 He made the comments while hosting his Israeli counterpart, Benjamin Netanyahu, a 
longtime ally
 and the subject of an ICC arrest warrant, in Budapest.
After Péter Magyar was elected as prime minister in a 
landslide victory
 last month, the 
new leader repeatedly vowed that his government would reverse the withdrawal
 before it took effect on 2 June.
On Monday, Magyar’s government submitted a bill to the parliament, setting in motion a fast-tracked procedure that resulted in 133 of the 199 lawmakers voting to back the bill.
The legislation must now be signed into law by the president, 
Tamás Sulyok,
 an Orbán-era appointee whom 
Magyar has repeatedly
 called on to resign.
Earlier this week, 
the ICC’s legislative body hailed Hungary’s plan to reverse the withdrawal,
 describing it as “essential” to ensuring accountability for the world’s gravest crimes.
Climate experts alarmed by deadly spring heatwaves searing Europe
Back to the heatwaves hitting large parts of 
Europe
,
 our Europe environment correspondent 
Ajit Niranjan 
spoke with experts who warned
 
of
 ‘new reality’ of heat extremes that claim three times more lives than car crashes and 16 times as many as murderers.
Just pause for a second on these numbers.
People cool off at a nasone, Rome's drinking water fountain, near the Colosseum during a heatwave in Rome, Italy.
 Photograph: Xinhua/Shutterstock
Ajit writes:


“The dark side of a gloriously hot European summer, excess mortality data compiled by experts … shows, is 
an almost unfathomably large death toll – one that society rarely treats as a crisis.
 


In 2024, 
summer heat
 in the EU claimed roughly three times more lives than 
car crashes
, 16 times more than 
murderers
, and more than 10,000 times more than 
terrorists
.


This year, summer highs are striking before spring is even over. 
It may herald worse heat to come
 as parts of 
Europe
 brace for yet another torrid season of punishing extremes.


Europe warming region data
Gulp.
Read Ajit’s full story here:
UK, Poland sign defence, security treaty in response to threat from Russia
Meanwhile over in London, 
Britain’s prime minister Keir Starmer and his Polish counterpart Donald Tusk have just signed a Polish-British defence and security treaty
, which seeks to strengthen the links between the two countries amid growing threats from Russia.
British prime minister Keir Starmer and Polish prime minister Donald Tusk at a signing ceremony for a defence and security agreement at the Battle of Britain Bunker in Uxbridge, London.
 Photograph: Jaimi Joy/EPA
After 
a brief signing ceremony at the Battle of Britain Bunker in west London
 – a nod to the Polish contribution to the Royal Air Force during the second world war – 
Starmer hailed the deal as a “generational uplift” in the UK’s defence relationship with Poland,
 saying it strengthened the relationship between the two countries “as we face the challenges of today.”
In particular, 
he referenced the continuing threat from Russia,
 which he said “we see that not just in 
Ukraine
 itself, but beyond Ukraine, impacting on our own countries.”
Poland’s Tusk said 
the agreement was rooted in “our shared values,”
 and determination to “defend” both countries and its peoples.
He said the treaty would also strengthen “the European solidarity,” both through Nato and in the broader international context.
“All of this gives hope that this unique, historic document, in this unique historical place, under the patronage of our pilots from 303 Squadron, will make our future safer,” Tusk said.
The deal focuses on defence and security issues,
 including mutual support and joint exercises, military procurement, air defence, cybersecurity, and broader infrastructure security.
Downing Street 
said
 it would include the 
joint use of “uncrewed systems to reinforce Nato’s Eastern Flank,”
 and “accelerated” cooperation on tackling “malicious” disinformation.
Briefing reporters before leaving for the UK this morning, 
Tusk suggested
 
the treaty
 
would
 go beyond previous deals agreed in 2017 and 2023, and 
include provisions for mutual security assistance outside Nato’s article 5 framework.
Tusk claimed the bilateral treaty would mean Poland could count on the UK for a “rapid bilateral response … before a decision is made by all 32 Nato members” in the event of a conflict.”
Britain already has defence and security deals with France and Germany, while Poland signed a similar agreement with Paris last year.
Iceland's minister fears 'Brexit moment' in looming EU accession talks referendum
Nordic correspondent
Meanwhile, 
Iceland’s foreign minister has said she fears her country faces a “Brexit moment” in its looming EU referendum amid warnings over misinformation, foreign interference and AI.
Þorgerður Katrín Gunnarsdóttir said Iceland is being hit with rhetoric and misinformation ‘from the Reform playbook’.
 Photograph: Thomas Traasdahl/Reuters
With 
just over three months to go until Iceland votes
 on whether or not to continue accession talks with the EU, developments are being closely watched by Washington, Moscow and Brussels.
Þorgerður Katrín Gunnarsdóttir
 accused individuals and groups from inside and outside the country of “fearmongering”, saying 
Iceland was being hit with misinformation and rhetoric taken “from the playbook of Nigel Farage and Reform”.
She said 
the referendum was at risk of being a target for Russia and “actors who seek to influence our public debate in a negative way”.
 Foreign interference and the spread of misinformation could end up affecting the result, the minister warned.
“I am fearing that we will face a Brexit moment,”
 she told the Guardian. “That would be, from my point of view, a rather dangerous path because … there were all kinds of lies put forward by the Brexiteers.” She cited disputed figures used by the leave campaign over how much money the UK sent to the EU.
‘It’s getting hotter and it’s not stopping’: dealing with the heat in five of Europe’s capitals
In recent days across parts of 
Europe
, temperatures have soared, heat records have been broken and spring has felt more like the height of summer.
Météo France, the French national weather service, 
has attributed this to a “heat dome”,
 with warmth held in place by a high-pressure weather front that has produced temperatures more than 10C above what used to be usual for this time of year.
People collect water from fountain at Plaza Mayor during an early heatwave hits Europe in Madrid, Spain.
 Photograph: Pablo Blázquez Domínguez/Getty Images
Human-caused climate breakdown is 
supercharging extreme weather
 around the world, driving deadly extremes that can strike at abnormal times in unusual places and claim lives.
Guardian reporters in five European capitals spoke to tourists and locals about how they have experienced this most recent period of unseasonable May heat,
 and their worries about what the climate emergency might mean for the future.
Jim, a visitor from Sydney, spoke for the majority of his fellow tourists when asked how he and his wife, Marina, were dealing with the May heatwave in Madrid. 
“These are not at all the temperatures we were expecting,”
 he said. “We brought clothes for cooler weather because that’s what we were expecting.”
“The heat is terrifying,”
 said Darcey, 21, of experiencing the heatwave inside her tiny, top-floor apartment in Paris. “It can feel so hot you’re almost scared to go outside and it’s sweltering being under the roof.”
Sales of hybrid cars shoot up across EU with Chinese brands extending market share
Senior correspondent

  Elsewhere, sales of hybrid cars have shot up across the EU in the wake of the watering down of emission targets late last year, new figures show.
Electric car charging station in Berlin, Germany.
 Photograph: Schoening/Alamy
The new rules have also 
helped Chinese brands extend their market ‌share,
 underlining growing political tensions over the growing deficit the EU has with China.
New figures show that 
every state in the EU, bar Finland and Ireland, have a deficit with China,
 which is now targeting middle industries, particularly in Germany leading to recent accusations that Berlin is sleep walking into deindustrialisation at the hands of Beijing.
There are concerns that sales of Chinese hybrid cars have shot up partly because there were not covered by the EU tariffs on EVs in 2024.
Data from 
the European Automobile Manufacturers’ Association (ACEA)
 on Wednesday shows that petrol and diesel cars account for just 30% of the new cars sold so far this year, down from 38% for the same period last year.
Electrified vehicles (battery-electric, plug-in hybrid and hybrid models) rose about 21% and made up more than two-thirds of total registrations,
 while petrol and diesel cars fell about 15% and 17%, respectively.
The figures add to evidence that 
emissions regulations subsidies and higher fuel costs are pushing buyers towards EV and hybrids
 even in countries in middle and southern Europe which have been slower than the nordics to transition to electric.
In Italy, which the car industry has complained about the lack of infrastructure, sales of EVs are up 73%, sales of hybrids up 26% and sales of plug-in hybrids up 99%.
In France sales of EVs are up 48% while in Germany there are up 41%. In Belgium, where car culture is strong particularly in Brussels, sales of Evs are only up 1.1%.
On the searches this morning, 
Sánchez broadly promises the party will fully cooperate with the justice system amid the ongoing investigation.
He adds that if there are any new irregularities, the party will “act with the same decisive force as before.”
He essentially toes the line of what 
the party said in its statement
.
Separately, asked about Zapatero’s legal problems, 
he reiterates his support for the former prime minister.
 He says he read the court order, and “there are no reasons to change” his position.
Peace, poverty, migration discussed by Sánchez, Pope Leo ahead of Spain trip next week
Sánchez is finally briefing reporters after his meetings with the Pope earlier this morning. 
He says 
the pair spoke about the need to “defend peace,”
 stressing that “peace is not build with missiles,” but “with dialogue and respect for international law.”
He also 
talked about their shared priorities in the fight against poverty, malnutrition, and the importance of improving global health situation.
Sánchez also says 
they talked about “the essential link between ethics and artificial intelligence,”
 after Pope Leo’s warnings about “the culture of power” driving the rise of AI globally.
The two leaders also talked about migration,
 strongly criticising those “who distort this debate with lies, hoaxes, disinformation.” The issue is expected to come up during Pope Leo’s visit to 
Spain
, particularly during his stay at the Canary Islands.
Sánchez also says he held wide-ranging talks with the Vatican’s chief diplomat, 
Pietro Parolin.
'War does not solve problems,' Pope Leo tells pilgrims as he decries 'intensification' in Ukraine
As we are waiting for 
Sánchez 
to show up for his press conference at the (very grand) Spanish embassy at the Vatican, 
we have just heard from Pope Leo, who decried what he called a “sharp intensification” of the war in 
Ukraine
,
 telling pilgrims at his weekly audience at the Vatican that he wanted to express closeness to civilians killed in recent attacks.
Pope Leo XIV arriving for his weekly general audience at St. Peter's square in the Vatican.
 Photograph: Alberto Pizzoli/AFP/Getty Images
“I am following with concern the war in Ukraine,” Leo, the first US pope, said. “
War does not solve problems, but aggravates them.
 It does not build security, but multiplies suffering and hatred.”
“
Where missiles and drones fall, hopes also fall,
 homes and places of worship are destroyed, and innocent lives are shattered,” he said in comments reported by Reuters.
Orange weather alert issued in Spain as temperatures expected to hit 40C
in Madrid
In 
Spain
, where temperatures could reach 40C (104F) this week, an orange weather alert was issued
 for the Basque Country amid predictions that the northern region could see the mercury hit 37C on Wednesday. Temperatures of 36C to 38C were forecast for southern regions, with a high of 38C in the southwestern city of Badajoz.
Are we just going to ignore the fact that there’s a giant King Kong wearing a Real Madrid shirt in the background?
 Photograph: Pablo Garcia/The Guardian
Spain’s state meteorological office, Aemet, said 
temperatures more normally seen in July had already been recorded across the country,
 adding that the current heat was “more characteristic of the dog days, the hottest period of the year”. It also said that such hot spells were the result of the climate emergency.
“It should be pointed out that 
climate change is leading to episodes of high temperatures throughout the year that are more frequent and more intense than in previous decades,
” said 
Rubén del Campo,
 an Aemet spokesperson.
“Both this episode and the atmospheric pattern that’s causing it are 
part and parcel of climate change
 and of what’s been observed in recent years.”
Separately, things are heating up in 
Spain
 
quite literally
, too.
Share
Updated at 
04.58 EDT
For what it’s worth, 
Pedro
 
Sánchez has now arrived at the Vatican, where he is expected to meet Pope Leo.
Spanish prime minister Pedro Sánchez arrives for a private audience with Pope Leo XIV at the San Damaso Courtyard in Vatican City.
 Photograph: Ettore Ferrari/EPA
The meeting comes 
just over a week before Leo’s planned visit to Spain
, set to begin on 6 June.
Leo will visit 
Madrid, Barcelona
 and 
the
 
Canary Islands
 and deliver twelve speeches, preside over four masses, and have around ten meetings with all sorts of leaders, 
according to the official schedule.
One of the key parts of the trip will include the inauguration and blessing of the Tower of Jesus Christ on the Basilica of the 
Sagrada Familia,
 which was completed earlier this year, bringing the church to its maximum final height 144 years after work began.
Sánchez is expected to brief the press once he’s out of his meeting.
Sanchez faces tricky June as scrutiny of his closest circle deepens - snap analyis
in Madrid
The coming days and weeks are shaping up to be an anxious time for Pedro Sánchez, his family, his party and his administration.
Spanish prime minister Pedro Sánchez arrives at the San Damaso courtyard for a meeting with Pope Leo XIV at the Vatican.
 Photograph: Yara Nardi/Reuters
Tomorrow, the PM’s younger brother, 
David Sánchez,
 will go on trial 
over allegations
 that he was handed a bespoke job by the socialist-led council of the south-western city of Badajoz in July 2017, when his brother was the national leader of the PSOE but was not yet prime minister.
Meanwhile, a judge investigating accusations that Sánchez’s wife,
 
Begoña Gómez,
 used her influence as the spouse of the prime minister 
to secure sponsors for a university master’s degree course she ran and used state funds to pay her assistant for help with personal matters, has summoned her to appear on 9 June.
David Sánchez and Gómez have denied any wrongdoing.
 Both have found themselves under investigation following complaints brought by the pressure group 
Manos Limpias
 (Clean Hands), a self-styled trade union 
with far-right links
 that has a long history of using the courts to pursue political targets.
The prime minister – who has said his family have been 
the victims
 of a “harassment and bullying operation” waged by his political and media opponents – has insisted that neither has committed any offence. 
Sánchez has also openly questioned the independence of some members of the Spanish judiciary,
 
claiming last year that
, “there’s no doubt that there are judges doing politics and there are politicians trying to do justice”.
Things took another bleak turn for the socialists last week 
when the former PSOE prime minister José 
Luis Rodríguez Zapatero
 was placed under investigation 
by a judge examining the state bailout of a Venezuela-linked airline during the Covid pandemic.
Former Spanish prime minister Jose Luis Rodríguez Zapatero is seen taking part in a rally ahead the Andalusian elections in mid-May.
 Photograph: Jesús Mérida/SOPA Images/Shutterstock
Zapatero, a totemic figure on the Spanish left who served as prime minister from 2004 to 2011, will appear before the judge on 18 and 19 June.
The latest investigation is part of 
an inquiry
 into the €53m (£46m) state rescue of the Spanish airline Plus Ultra in March 2021. Prosecutors are examining whether the company made “inadequate use” of the public funds the government approved for the bailout, while anti-corruption police are investigating whether the airline used the rescue money to launder funds from Venezuela through France, Switzerland and Spain.
According to the investigating judge, 
Zapatero is alleged to have overseen “a hierarchical structure of influence peddling”,
 whose purpose was “to obtain economic benefits through intermediation and the exercise of influence before public bodies in favour of third parties, mainly Plus Ultra”.
Zapatero released a video last week in which he insisted on his innocence and stated his willingness to cooperate with the investigation.
“I’d like to reaffirm that all my public and private activity has always been conducted with absolute respect for the law,” he said, adding he had never carried out “any action” relating to the airline’s bailout.
Morning opening: Spanish police searches Socialist Party's HQ in Madrid, deepening Sánchez's woes
Spanish police entered the ruling Socialist Party’s headquarters in Madrid on a judicial order to gather information on a possible illegal financing scheme,
 several news Spanish news outlets reported.
A portrait of Spanish prime minister Pedro Sánchez is partially obscured by a shutter on the main facade of the PSOE headquarters in Madrid.
 Photograph: David Canales/SOPA Images/Shutterstock
A spokesperson for the Guardia Civil force told Reuters 
officers had entered the premises but did not disclose any further details
 since the proceedings are secret.
The search takes place amid intensifying focus on separate allegations of influence peddling and corruption linked to former prime minister 
José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero
 and the immediate family of current PM 
Pedro Sánchez
, creating a somewhat precarious situation for both the party and the embattled premier.
Sánchez, however, is in Rome today for a visit to the Vatican, where he is scheduled to meet with 
Pope Leo 
this morning. A press conference is expected following the meeting, where he will undoubtedly face a barrage of questions regarding the searches back in Madrid.
Elsewhere, I will keep an eye on day three of the heatwave engulfing large parts of western Europe, the latest news coming from 
Ukraine
 and the Baltics, and the UK-Polish defence and security treaty that will be signed in London.
Lots to cover.
It’s 
Wednesday, 27 May 2026
, it’s 
Jakub Krupa
 here, and this is 
Europe Live
.
Good morning.