The Russian strikes damaged homes, schools and other civilian buildings in Ukraine’s two most populous cities, including the grounds of the 
Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra
, a historic monastery that is a 
UNESCO
 World Heritage Site and one of the country’s most significant religious and cultural landmarks.
An art museum in Kharkiv also sustained damage.
Night of terror
Matthias Schmale, the UN Humanitarian Coordinator for Ukraine, 
condemned
 the large-scale missile and drone attacks, noting that fires broke out in residential buildings and that children were among the overall casualties.


“For millions of people across the country, the night was marked by hours of air raid sirens and the terrifying sounds of explosions,” he said. 
Yura, an eight-year-old boy in Kyiv, was among them.
“It was loud,” he 
told
 the UN Children’s Fund (
UNICEF
). “We were woken by the explosion and realised it was nearby.”
Emergency workers killed
UN humanitarians said the attacks followed a weekend of hostilities that reportedly killed at least 18 civilians and injured about 150 others in front-line and border regions, according to the authorities.  
In Kyiv, nearly 30 residential buildings, educational facilities and other civilian premises were damaged, while approximately 140,000 households temporarily lost electricity due to damage to power infrastructure.
In Kharkiv, four rescuers were reportedly killed and six injured in a double-tap strike while responding to an earlier attack. 
Culture in the crosshairs
Mr. Schmale noted that “beyond the loss and destruction, these strikes on sites of Ukraine’s history and culture are seen by many as attacks on the country’s history and spirit.”
UNESCO, the UN educational and cultural agency, 
condemned
 the strike on the Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra.
The monastery dates back to the 11th century and is located within a property in the historic city centre that also includes the Saint-Sophia Cathedral and related buildings.
UNESCO said the strike reportedly caused significant damage to the exterior and interior of the Dormition Cathedral, which is in the Pechersk Lavra.
“Adjacent historic structures, including elements of the Lavra’s fortification complex and Ivan Kushnik Tower, were also reportedly impacted,” the agency added.
Protect civilians, safeguard cultural sites
Mr. Schmale recalled that “international humanitarian law provides special protection to cultural and religious sites as attacks affecting them deprive communities of shared heritage and a sense of belonging.”
He said this latest wave of attacks adds to the ongoing trend of increased harm to civilians in Ukraine.
Russia launched its full-scale invasion on 24 February 2022, and UN human rights monitors recently 
reported
 that May 2026 saw the highest monthly number of civilian casualties in four years.
 “International humanitarian law is clear: civilians, including first responders, and civilian infrastructure must be protected. Homes and civilian objects, including cultural heritage sites, must be safeguarded,” he said.