UN Spokesperson Stéphane Dujarric updated journalists on the activities of the UN Interim Force in Lebanon (
UNIFIL
) and ongoing humanitarian support to people displaced by hostilities between Israeli troops and Hezbollah militants. 
He 
said
 UNIFIL 
peacekeepers reported observing 143 trajectories of projectiles on Thursday, with 119 attributed to Israel and the remainder to Hezbollah
, and no violations of Lebanese airspace. 
On Wednesday, they observed 364 projectile launches, with 330 attributed to Israel and 34 to Hezbollah, as well as 38 airspace violations.  
UNIFIL convoy obstructed
 
Peacekeepers also continue to observe 
extensive Israeli ground activities throughout the mission’s area of operations
, he said, noting that a UNIFIL convoy was obstructed by two Israeli tanks in Tiri on Wednesday. 
One of the tanks aimed its weapon at a UNIFIL vehicle
, while soldiers signalled the convoy to halt, forcing the patrol to stop and reverse. The convoy was later allowed to take an alternate route to its intended destination. 
“We reiterate once again that UNIFIL peacekeepers must have unrestricted freedom of movement throughout their area of operations, as they are doing their work on behalf of the 
Security Council
,” he said. 
Underlining UN commitment
 
Meanwhile, the UN Deputy Special Coordinator and top humanitarian official in Lebanon, Imran Riza, together with UNIFIL head Major General Diodato Abagnara, held talks with President Joseph Aoun and Speaker of Parliament Nabih Berri in Beirut on Wednesday. 
“General Abagnara stressed that 
UNIFIL remains committed to supporting, in close coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces, the full implementation of 
resolution 1701
, which continues to be the framework for restoring stability and security in south Lebanon,” the Spokesperson said. 
Read more about Resolution 1701 (2006) in our 
explainer
.
 
Humanitarian update
 
Turning to humanitarian developments, Mr. Dujarric said UNIFIL facilitated nine humanitarian missions on Wednesday in the western sector of its area of operations. 
The 
UN humanitarian affairs chief Tom Fletcher has also 
announced
 an additional $12 million allocation from the Central Emergency Response Fund
 
(CERF)
 to help hundreds of thousands of people displaced by the conflict.  
“The funding will help people access healthcare and protection from gender-based violence, among other critical services,” said Mr. Dujarric. 
“It will also help address the growing food insecurity that we are seeing among some of the displaced population in Lebanon.” 
Difficult return home
 
Nearly 50,000 people have returned to their homes in Nabatieh and South Governorates since the announcement of the regional ceasefire, 
according to
 the UN humanitarian agency 
OCHA
.   
Yet, 
more than 106,000 remain in collective sites across the country
, and many others are seeking shelter elsewhere.  
Moreover, OCHA said partners warn that continued insecurity, widespread destruction and limited access to basic services are continuing to prevent many people from returning home.