G7 leaders issue joint statement calling for 'immediate ceasefire' in Lebanon
A meeting was held this morning between world leaders on the final day of the G7 summit in France.
In a joint statement issued earlier, 
G7 leaders called for “an immediate ceasefire” in 
Lebanon
.
“In Lebanon, we support, through an immediate robust ceasefire, the Lebanese leadership’s efforts to achieve the disarmament of 
Hezbollah
 and the monopoly of arms, and to protect Lebanon’s territorial integrity and sovereignty with the appropriate international security guarantees,” the statement said.
US president Donald Trump, UK prime minister Keir Starmer, French president Emmanuel Macron and Canadian prime minister Mark Carney attend a working session with G7 leaders at the summit in Evian-les-Bains, France.
 Photograph: Evelyn Hockstein/Reuters
Trump and Macron on the final day of the G7 summit.
 Photograph: Christian Hartmann/Reuters
German chancellor Friedrich Merz with world leaders at the G7 summit.
 Photograph: Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images
Share
Updated at 
06.47 EDT
Key events
Trump also addressed media reports of a leaked US-Iran deal (see post at 
11:57
), 
denying claims it includes a $300bn reconstruction fund for Tehran.
“We’re not putting up 10 cents,” he said. “We are not investing and we do not have a fund.”
When pressed on whether he would ask Gulf countries to invest in the fund, Trump said: “No, I’m not, I’m not. If they do it, fine. But I would say they won’t be doing it for a while until they find out the behaviour. It’s a behaviour thing, but we are not investing.”
Share
Updated at 
07.27 EDT
'If they don't behave, we will go right back to dropping bombs right smack in middle of their heads,' Trump says on Iran
US president 
Donald Trump
 said the deal with Iran is “not final”
 and threatened to 
“go back to shooting” 
Tehran if it does not
 “behave”.
Speaking to reporters before meeting with Egyptian president Abdel Fatah el-Sisi at the G7 summit, he said:


double quotation mark
It’s not final. It’s a memorandum of understanding, and 
if I don’t like it, we’ll go back to shooting at them
, dropping bombs on their head.


If I don’t like it, 
if they don’t behave, we’ll go right back to dropping bombs right smack in the middle of their head,
 okay, because they’ve misbehaved for 47 years.”


US president Donald Trump speaks during a bilateral meeting with Egypt’s president on the sidelines of the G7 summit.
 Photograph: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images
Share
Updated at 
07.09 EDT
Several US media outlets have reported details of leaked copies of the interim agreement between the US and 
Iran
. Many details of the terms have already been reported by Iranian media, but neither Washington nor Tehran have officially confirmed the contents of the memorandum of understanding that is due to be formally signed on Friday.
Under the agreement, Iran will 
immediately take steps to reopen the strait of Hormuz
 once the tentative deal is signed, and it will be 
allowed to sell its oil without restrictions,
 AP reported.
The news agency stated that, according to the leaked text, Washington would secure at least 
$300bn for the reconstruction and economic development of Iran
 and work to 
end all US and UN sanctions imposed on Tehran
 if a final agreement addressing its nuclear programme is reached.
The deal 
calls for an immediate end to all fighting between Israel and 
Hezbollah
 in Lebanon,
 but it makes no mention of a withdrawal of Israeli troops, a key demand of Iran, AP reported.
Share
Updated at 
06.59 EDT
An Israeli real estate event in north London appears to have advertised the sale of land in Israeli settlements in East Jerusalem and the occupied West Bank, 
despite previous denials
 that illegal settlement properties would be marketed at the event.
Pamphlets shared with the Guardian from the event on Sunday showed real estate projects in Ma’ale Adumim, Givat Ze’ev, Kfar Eldad and Teneh Omarim in the occupied 
West Bank
, as well as Ramat Eshkol and Givat Hamatos in East Jerusalem.
The event was held after more than 100 UK lawmakers as well as civil society organisations had called for its cancellation, saying it was inconsistent with the government’s obligations under international law as well as guidance on settlement-related economic activity.
“There is a prima facie case at the very least that people were advertising land in illegal settlements and that is contrary to law, and the government needs to act,” said Andy McDonald MP, co-chair of the British-Palestine all-party parliamentary group.
Read more:
In their joint statement, the leaders of the G7 also (very briefly) pledged to 
“accelerate humanitarian and reconstruction efforts”
 and implement 
“relevant political and security measures” in Gaza.
“We call for 
ending violence in the West Bank,”
 the G7 leaders said.
Attacks by Israeli settlers and the military on Palestinians in the occupied West Bank have become commonplace, amid what human rights groups say is a campaign of abuse and harassment to push Palestinians off their land and expand Jewish settlements.
In the most recent attack, 
Israeli settlers vandalised a mosque and set it ablaze in the Palestinian village of Jaljilya,
 according to local reports. Pictures show the damage inside the building with Hebrew graffiti daubed on the walls.
A man inspects the damage inside a mosque reportedly burnt by Israeli settlers overnight, in the Israeli-occupied West Bank village of Jaljilya.
 Photograph: Ilia Yefimovich/AFP/Getty Images
A man walks past the damaged mosque, with one of the Hebrew graffiti reading “nekama” or “revenge”.
 Photograph: Ilia Yefimovich/AFP/Getty Images
Share
Updated at 
07.11 EDT
Meanwhile, Nato secretary general 
Mark Rutte
 hailed the US-Iran deal to end the Middle East war, saying the planned reopening of the strait of Hormuz would be a 
“massive step forward”.
“I know that many allies, through the initiative led by France and the United Kingdom, are ready to support,” Rutte told a press conference in Brussels.
You can follow our Europe live blog for more of Rutte’s remarks and other related news here:
The G7 leaders’ statement described the announcement of a US-Iran deal to end the Middle East war as a 
“historic opportunity”
 and a 
“breakthrough”.
The statement signed by the leaders of the UK, US, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and Canada said:


double quotation mark
We welcome the announcement of a deal between the United States and Iran, secured under the strong leadership of President Trump, with the support of mediating countries, which 
provides an historic opportunity to prevent Iran from acquiring any nuclear weapon and tackling the threats related to its regional and ballistic activities.
 We support and are ready to contribute to its implementation.”


It also added that an initiative led by the UK and France can help to reopen the strait of Hormuz to maritime traffic, but it cautioned that further negotiations were needed “
to address the threats posed by Iran in the region and beyond”.
Share
Updated at 
05.23 EDT
G7 leaders issue joint statement calling for 'immediate ceasefire' in Lebanon
A meeting was held this morning between world leaders on the final day of the G7 summit in France.
In a joint statement issued earlier, 
G7 leaders called for “an immediate ceasefire” in 
Lebanon
.
“In Lebanon, we support, through an immediate robust ceasefire, the Lebanese leadership’s efforts to achieve the disarmament of 
Hezbollah
 and the monopoly of arms, and to protect Lebanon’s territorial integrity and sovereignty with the appropriate international security guarantees,” the statement said.
US president Donald Trump, UK prime minister Keir Starmer, French president Emmanuel Macron and Canadian prime minister Mark Carney attend a working session with G7 leaders at the summit in Evian-les-Bains, France.
 Photograph: Evelyn Hockstein/Reuters
Trump and Macron on the final day of the G7 summit.
 Photograph: Christian Hartmann/Reuters
German chancellor Friedrich Merz with world leaders at the G7 summit.
 Photograph: Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images
Share
Updated at 
06.47 EDT
The Canadian prime minister, 
Mark Carney,
 has described the US-Iran memorandum of understanding to end hostilities in the Middle East as a 
“gamechanger”.
“Not just for this situation … it allows us – and this is what’s happened in the meeting – to step back and look anew at Ukraine,” he told CNN on the final day of the G7 summit in France.
Canadian prime minister Mark Carney with US president Donald Trump at the G7 summit in Evian-les-Bains, France.
 Photograph: Getty Images
Carney said he has seen a copy of the tentative deal struck between Washington and Tehran, which reportedly calls for the immediate lifting of the US naval blockade on Iranian ports and the reopening of the strait of Hormuz.
“I have to say, it’s exceeded my expectations,” he said.
The terms of the deal have not been made public and Carney did not disclose how he was able to see a copy other than saying “we have our sources”.
He said the deal “sets the groundwork to ensure Iran doesn’t have a nuclear weapon,” adding: “The Rubicon, if I can use that metaphor, has been crossed.”
Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of the crisis in the Middle East.
Iran’s military has threatened to respond to Israel after strikes in southern 
Lebanon
 killed four people,
 despite an agreement being reached between Tehran and Washington to end the Middle East war, including in Lebanon.
Lebanon’s National News Agency reported Israeli warplanes targeting the southern town of Nabatieh al-Fawqa and a drone strike in Ansariyeh on the coast this morning. There was no immediate comment from the 
Israel
 Defense Forces (IDF) on the reports.
In an update yesterday, the IDF said it intercepted “several rockets” launched by 
Hezbollah
 towards its troops operating in southern Lebanon, and that it struck and destroyed the launcher.
Hezbollah has not issued any recent statements claiming attacks on Israeli targets in southern Lebanon. The group’s leader, 
Naim Qassem,
 is due to make a televised address today, according to Hezbollah’s Al-Manar TV.
The Iranian military’s central command Khatam al-Anbiya said Israel must halt its acts of aggression in the south 
or face “a harsh response” from its forces.
 It accused Israel of 
violating the ceasefire in Lebanon “84 times”
 since the deal was announced.
A man stands on the rubble of his destroyed house in Nabatiyeh, southern Lebanon, following the announcement of an initial ceasefire agreement between the US and Iran.
 Photograph: Hussein Malla/AP
Iran’s top diplomat and foreign minister, 
Abbas Araghchi,
 said a peace deal with the US would 
require Israel to withdraw from Lebanon
. “Without the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the territories they occupied during this war, the war has not fully come to an end,” he said.
Concerns have been growing that Israel could undermine diplomatic efforts to finally end the Middle East war, with 
Donald Trump
 criticising his ally and war partner as irresponsible.
“Israel has been fighting Hezbollah for too long and too many people are being killed,” Trump said. “You don’t need to knock down an apartment house when you are looking for somebody because there are a lot of people in those apartment houses, and they are not all Hezbollah, that I can tell you.”




A US-Iran deal aimed at ending the Middle East war will be signed at Switzerland’s mountainside Burgenstock resort on Friday, the Swiss foreign ministry confirmed to AFP. 
The site, located near Lucerne in central Switzerland, is difficult to access and therefore easily secured. It “was proposed by the Pakistani and Qatari mediators, as well as by the US and Iran”, Switzerland’s foreign ministry said.




Two months of final negotiations will begin immediately after the initial deal between the US and Iran is signed
. Negotiations will continue for a 60-day window after the ceremony, officials told AFP, leading to a plan for the lifting of economic sanctions and decisions on the fate of Iran’s nuclear programme.




Trump said that he would send the deal with Iran to the US Congress for a review.
 “I like the idea, send it to Congress please,” he said at the start of a meeting with the UAE president Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan on the sidelines of the G7 summit. “I mean who wouldn’t approve it.”




Speaking at the G7, Trump has said the strait of Hormuz will be open by Friday and that the full text of the peace deal will be released in a “formal setting”. 
Trump also said he expects the “second stage” of the deal “to go quickly”.




The US will allow Iran to immediately start selling oil and fuel again as part of the deal to end the war, 
the Wall Street Journal reported, citing sources familiar with the matter. Iran can only sell oil if they keep to the terms of the deal, as US official told Reuters. It includes the free flow of navigation in the strait of Hormuz and not obtaining an nuclear weapon.




An Iranian deputy foreign minister said the two-month US naval blockade on Iranian ports had been lifted ahead of the planned formal signing of a deal ending the war. 
“The lifting of the blockade was something we had emphasised from the outset. It has now begun, and the blockade has been lifted prior to the formal signing” scheduled for Friday, said Iranian deputy foreign minister Majid Takht-Ravanchi, according to the government’s website.




Qatar, a key mediator between the US and Iran, said it believed the framework peace agreement could deliver security to the Middle East.
 “We are cautiously optimistic that the signing of the memorandum of understanding will lead to the next phase of regional security through the talks that will take place on the nuclear programme and on other issues,” foreign ministry spokesperson Majed Al Ansari told reporters in Doha, as he praised Pakistan’s mediation efforts.