Crisis (IPC Phase 3) anticipated in the south through January driven by weather shocks 
Key Messages 
Malawi - Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027 
Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes are expected in parts 
of southern Malawi (the area of highest concern) and 
localized areas of the central region from October 2026 
through January 2027, a marked deterioration following 
widespread Minimal (IPC Phase 1) and Stressed (IPC Phase 2) 
outcomes through September. These outcomes will likely be 
driven by the early depletion of household food stocks 
following below-average 2026 harvests and reduced 
purchasing power. Above-average food prices, combined with 
atypically low agricultural labor opportunities, are expected to 
constrain poor households’ ability to access food through market 
purchases, leading to food consumption gaps. Stressed (IPC 
Phase 2) outcomes are expected across the remaining southern 
districts and several central region districts over the same 
period, as households are likely to meet minimum food needs 
but cannot afford some non-food expenditures without engaging 
in negative coping strategies. 
Below-average rainfall is likely in southern Malawi during 
the 2026/27 season, with October to January rains delayed 
and poorly distributed. Households’ purchasing power is 
expected to decline due to below-average agricultural labor 
income. These conditions are associated with the forecasted 
strengthening El Niño, which was present as of June and is 
likely to intensify into a very strong event. In contrast, central 
and northern Malawi are likely to receive near-average to above-
average rainfall with planting starting in early November, 
supporting favorable cropping conditions. 
The main harvest has been completed across the country, 
with average yields reported at the national level, thanks to 
favorable rainfall conditions. However, the southern region of 
Malawi, including the Southern Lakeshore, Middle Shire, and 
Lower Shire Livelihood Zones, experienced below-average 
harvests due to dry spells and flooding during the main rainy 
season. 
FEWS NET estimates that 1.5-1.99 million people will require 
humanitarian food assistance during the October- January 
lean season. This represents a decline compared to the same 
period last year, reflecting improved national maize production 
and lower staple food prices. While plans for humanitarian assistance have not yet been finalized, past trends 
indicate that assistance is typically provided from November through at least January, coinciding with the peak 
of the lean season. 
FEWS NET is a United States Government-funded activity. The content of this report does not
necessarily reflect the view of the United States Government.
FEWS NET Malawi
malawi@fews.net
fews.net/southern-africa/malawi
The analysis in this report is based on information available as of June 26, 2026. 
Food security context 
Agriculture is central to Malawi’s economy, supporting the livelihoods of over 80 percent 
of the population and providing employment and income for most of the workforce. While small-scale and 
subsistence farming dominate the crop production sector, commercial cash crop farming makes 
a significant contribution. The main crops cultivated include maize (the staple food), as well as tobacco, tea, and 
sugarcane (the main cash crops). The northern and central regions are known for surplus production, 
helping to offset the deficits in the south, where small landholdings, poor soil fertility, recurrent weather shocks, and 
semi-arid conditions limit production.  
The rainy season (October-March) influences crop production activities, pasture availability, and availability of 
agricultural labor opportunities, leading up to and during the main maize harvest (typically April-August). The start of 
the main harvest coincides with the end of the typical lean season and the start of the consumption year, key timing 
given the importance of crop production and income sources for poor and rural households. In February (before the 
lean season ends), agricultural activities such as weeding typically provide increased employment 
opportunities. Agricultural activities on irrigated farms also typically enhance labor demand beyond the main harvest 
season (through November). Irrigated winter crop production supplements the main harvest, providing households 
with additional food, income sources, and stabilized prices due to increased food supply in local markets. Winter 
planting typically occurs between April and August in lowland areas that benefit from the residual moisture or access 
to irrigation facilities, with the winter harvest typically expected from September to November. 
Tobacco plays a crucial role in Malawi’s economy, serving as a source of hard currency, strengthening the 
country's foreign exchange reserves, and supporting overall economic stability. Tobacco production is highly 
labor intensive, involving planting, tending, harvesting, curing, processing, and auctioning, and provides widespread 
employment opportunities and household income, particularly for the poor. The tobacco auction season, which 
begins in April/May and continues through August/September, attracts traders, buyers, and day laborers from across 
the country. However, the sector faces persistent challenges, including limited input supply and volatile market 
conditions, which can negatively disrupt the tobacco value chain. 
Malawi's food security is highly susceptible to extreme weather events, which frequently disrupt 
agricultural production. Periodic droughts and floods have destroyed crops, leading to reductions in food 
availability and income-earning opportunities. Severe droughts linked to El Niño in 2015, 2016, and the 2023/
24 season, along with flooding from Tropical Cyclones Ana and Gombe (2021/22), Freddy (2023), Chido (2024), and 
Jude (March 2025), caused major reductions in maize and other food crops production, particularly in the southern 
part of the country where the cyclones hit.  
High rates of poverty in rural areas and unemployment in towns and cities limit households' ability to buy 
enough food, earn income, and access agricultural inputs. The country’s broader economic instability often leads 
to sharp price increases, resulting in above-average costs for locally produced and imported food, essential non-food 
items, fertilizer, and fuel. 
Learn more 
Follow these links for additional information: 
Latest Malawi Food Security Outlook: February 2026 to September 2026 
Latest Food Security Outlook Update for Malawi: April 2026 to September 2026 
Latest Malawi Key Message Update: May 2026 
Overview of FEWS NET’s scenario development methodology 
FEWS NET’s approach to estimating the population in need 
Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 2
Current anomalies in food security conditions as of June 2026 
The 2026 maize harvest for some parts of the Middle Shire, Lower Shire, and Southern Lakeshore livelihood 
zones is below the five-year average. Below-average rainfall and dry spells during the maize flowering stage (mid-
January to mid-February) led to moisture stress and reduced yields in these areas (Figure 1). In addition, intense 
rainfall in mid-March triggered flash floods in several central and southern districts, causing localized crop damage 
and further lowering production in affected areas. The flooding was also accompanied by washaways, waterlogging, 
soil erosion, and siltation, which damaged cropland, and adversely affected crop performance in some localized 
areas. 
Foreign exchange reserves remain below average, with foreign exchange availability still scarce amid high import 
demand and low export earnings. Businesses continue to face import challenges due to the limited availability of 
foreign currency at formal financial institutions. According to the World Bank, the current parallel market premium is 
around 140 percent above the official MWK/USD exchange rate. These foreign exchange shortages and high 
premiums are constraining the importation of essential commodities, including fuel, medicines, and key production 
inputs. 
Annual headline inflation remains elevated at around 23 percent 
as of May 2026, driven primarily by persistently high non-food 
inflation. 
Income from crop sales is below average in some parts of the 
southern region, including the Middle Shire and Lower Shire 
livelihood zones, and central and southern lakeshore districts of 
Salima, Nkhota-kota, and Mangochi, driven by below-average crop 
production. 
Fuel prices remain significantly above average, largely driven by 
increases in international oil prices and high transportation costs. 
Although the Malawi Energy Regulatory Authority (MERA) 
implemented a 9.5 percent reduction in gasoline and a 5.7 percent 
drop in diesel in June 2026, this adjustment has provided only 
limited relief given the magnitude of earlier increases. 
Maize grain prices are currently above the five-year average, 
although they have experienced typical seasonal declines following 
the main harvest. At Mitundu, the national reference market 
monitored by FEWS NET, prices remain approximately 40 percent 
higher than the five-year average, despite a 20 percent decline 
observed between April and May 2026. 
Increased market reliance, particularly among very poor 
families, are above average in Neno, Mwanza, parts of 
Blantyre, Chikwawa, Nsanje, Phalombe, and certain areas of 
Mangochi, Mulanje, and Thyolo, following a period of below-
average staple crop production. Consequently, there is an atypically 
high dependence on the market for cereals. According to data from the Malawi Vulnerability Assessment Committee 
(MVAC) household survey, 20 to 40 percent of households in these regions are relying on markets for cereals and 
tubers immediately post-harvest (unseasonally early). 
Overview of the IPC and IPC-compatible analysis 
FEWS NET’s approach to humanitarian food assistance analysis 
Figure 1 
CHIRPS rainfall anomalies January-
February 2026 
Source: FEWS NET/USGS 
Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 3
Non-agricultural labor income, especially from construction-related work, is below average, particularly in urban 
and southern areas, driven by a slowdown in construction activity. 
Tobacco prices have remained lower than both last year and the average for the past three years, according 
to the Tobacco Commission. Prices are approximately 15 percent lower than the same period last year, standing at 
around 2.07 USD/kilogram (kg), down from 2.45 USD/kg. These prices are approximately 20 percent below the five-
year average. 
Humanitarian food assistance 
Currently, there is no humanitarian assistance program being implemented in the districts. The lean season 
humanitarian food assistance delivered by the Department of Disaster Management Affairs (DoDMA), in partnership 
with WFP, concluded in March after distributions were completed in several southern and central districts. 
Current acute food insecurity outcomes as of June 2026 
Southern areas 
Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes are prevailing in Mwanza, Neno, 
Chikwawa, Nsanje, and parts of Mangochi district. Poor 
households have minimally adequate food consumption from 
own‑produced 2026 harvests and are supplementing with market 
purchases. However, poor households face below-average purchasing 
power as income-earning opportunities remain below average during 
the post-harvest period, and below-average crop production resulted 
in reduced income from crop sales. As a result, most households have 
constrained purchasing power and are unable to afford necessary 
non‑food expenditures. Most households are meeting their basic food 
needs through consumption of staple foods, primarily consisting of 
maize and vegetables. 
Central and northern areas 
Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes continue in Salima and Nkhota-
kota districts in the central region. Households are mostly relying 
on own-produced food stocks despite below-average maize 
production, supplemented by market purchases, minimally meeting 
their basic food, but not non-food needs, due to reduced purchasing 
power. Minimal (IPC Phase 1) outcomes continue in the remaining 
maize surplus- and tobacco‑producing districts of the central region 
and the northern region. Households in these areas are meeting their 
food and non-food needs, supported by access to own‑produced food 
stocks and typical to above‑average income from crop sales, 
agricultural labor, and self‑employment activities. Additionally, households’ purchasing power has improved due to 
increased income from sales of horticultural crops such as onions, tomatoes, green leafy and other vegetables.  
Urban areas 
Urban areas are currently facing Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes, with poor households able to meet minimum 
food needs but facing difficulties in covering essential non-food expenditures such as education, health, and housing. 
Persistently high costs of living — including elevated housing, transportation, and utility expenses and below-average 
incomes from both domestic and construction labor activities — continue to erode households’ purchasing power 
and constrain access to basic services. 
Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 4
Key assumptions about atypical food security conditions underpinning the most likely scenario through 
January 2027 
Humanitarian food assistance 
Forecasts from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) indicate strengthening of 
El Niño conditions through at least January 2027. This is expected to result in a below-average start to the 
October 2026 rainy season, especially in southern areas. A strong event will likely lead to below-average rainfall 
and prolonged dry spells, particularly in structurally deficit-producing southern areas. 
Area planted for maize in southern regions is expected to be below average due to anticipated El Niño 
conditions, including delayed and below-average rainfall. An increased number of middle and better-off 
households are likely to reduce their farming activities. 
Foreign exchange shortages are expected to persist through at least January 2027, driven by structurally 
low export earnings, high import demand, and limited foreign reserves. Parallel market exchange rate 
premiums are expected to remain elevated, exceeding 100 percent of the official rate. 
Annual headline inflation is expected to remain elevated through January 2027. The Reserve Bank of 
Malawi (RBM) projects 22 percent headline inflation for 2026. Although month-to-month volatility may 
moderate between June and September, inflation will likely remain above the five-year average from October 
through January. 
Fuel shortages are anticipated between June 2026 and January 2027 due to foreign exchange constraints. 
With MERA’s reinstated Automatic Pricing Mechanism for fuel, domestic fuel prices will likely follow 
international price trends. 
Maize grain prices are expected to rise from June through September. However, they will remain about 15 
percent below last year’s levels, supported by food stocks from the recent harvest. Despite this, prices will stay 
around 70 percent above the five-year average. Between October and January, as market reliance grows, prices 
will rise further, approaching last year’s levels and remaining about 65 percent above the five-year average 
(Figure 2). 
Figure 2 
Maize price projections for Mitundu 
market 
Source: FEWS NET 
Access to improved agricultural inputs will likely remain 
constrained, especially for poorer households, due to 
substantially above-average prices for improved seeds 
and fertilizer amid reduced purchasing power. As a result, 
most farmers are expected to rely on lower-quality recycled 
seed and open-pollinated varieties and to apply fertilizer at 
rates below recommended levels. 
Agricultural and non-agricultural labor opportunities will 
likely remain below average in parts of the south due to 
an anticipated reduction in cultivated areas. 
Below-average livestock body conditions are expected from 
October through January due to limited feed and water 
availability, especially in the southern region, where the 2026/
27 rainfall season is likely to be delayed and below average. 
Income from tobacco sales in 2026 is anticipated to enhance the purchasing power of households in 
tobacco-producing regions. However, below-average tobacco prices and the poor quality of tobacco leaves 
compared to previous years at the auction floors are expected to decrease overall earnings. 
Government and other humanitarian actors typically implement a lean season humanitarian assistance 
Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 5
Projected acute food insecurity outcomes through January 2027 
Southern areas 
Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes are expected to persist in Mwanza, Neno, Chikwawa, Nsanje, and parts of 
Mangochi district from June through September. During this period, poor households in these areas are expected 
to continue accessing food through their own food stocks, enabling them to meet their minimum food consumption 
needs. However, below-average incomes and reduced purchasing power will constrain households' access to 
essential non-food needs. 
Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes are expected in Mwanza, Neno, Chikwawa, Nsanje, Balaka, Phalombe, 
Chiradzulu and parts of Mangochi districts from October 2026 through January 2027, driven by constrained 
household access to food and depletion of food stocks. As the lean season starts, below-average incomes from 
agricultural labor — due to El Niño–related reductions in cropping and associated employment opportunities — 
alongside weakened purchasing power are expected to limit households’ ability to meet food needs through market 
purchases. As a result, food consumption gaps are expected to emerge among very poor households. During this 
period, households will increasingly rely on consumption-based coping strategies, such as reducing meal frequency 
and portion sizes and skipping meals, alongside livelihood coping strategies, including selling productive assets (e.g., 
farm tools, goats/chicken) to access food. FEWS NET’s June 2026 Household Economy Analysis (HEA) confirmed that 
very poor households in these districts are expected to face survival deficits (less than 20 percent) from October 2026 
through January 2027. Deterioration in acute malnutrition is expected; however, global acute malnutrition (GAM) 
rates are expected to remain within Acceptable levels.  
Central and northern areas 
Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes are expected to persist in Salima and Nkhota-kota districts, particularly in 
the southern and northern lakeshore livelihood zones, from June through September. During this period, very 
poor households are anticipated to maintain minimally adequate food consumption but will remain unable to meet 
essential non-food expenditures due to constrained purchasing power. Households are expected to continue relying 
on their own-produced food stocks despite below-average maize production and supplement them with market 
purchases. Access to non-food needs is expected to remain constrained due to slow livelihood recovery following 
consecutive years of flooding and dry spells. 
Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes are expected in localized areas of Salima and Nkhota-kota districts from 
October 2026 through January 2027. As the lean season starts, households are expected to face increasing 
pressure due to the anticipated early depletion of food stocks and increased reliance on market purchases. This shift 
to market dependence is expected to coincide with seasonally rising, above-average food prices and below-average 
income-earning opportunities — particularly from agricultural labor — thereby further constraining households’ 
purchasing power. As a result, food access is expected to deteriorate, leading to food consumption gaps among very 
poor households. Very poor households will engage in both consumption-based coping strategies, such as reducing 
meal frequency and portion sizes, and livelihood-based coping strategies, such as selling productive assets. FEWS 
NET’s June 2026 Household Economy Analysis (HEA) projects that very poor households across these districts will face 
survival deficits of less than 20 percent from October 2026 to January 2027. Seasonal deterioration in acute 
malnutrition is expected from October through January, consistent with lean season trends. However, GAM rates are 
expected to remain within an Acceptable range. Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes are expected in Kasungu and 
Ntchisi districts from October through January 2027, as households are anticipated to have minimally adequate food 
consumption but be unable to afford some essential non-food expenses due to reduced purchasing power driven by 
below-average incomes from wage labor and self-employment. 
program from November through at least January, based on identified needs and the estimated period of 
intervention. Based on historical trends, some deficit-producing districts (up to 20 percent of the population) in 
the south are expected to receive humanitarian assistance between December and January. 
Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 6
Minimal (IPC Phase 1) outcomes are expected until January 2027 in the remaining central and northern 
regions, including maize surplus and tobacco-producing districts. Households are expected to meet their 
essential food and non-food needs through their own food stocks and average purchasing power from livelihood 
activities such as agricultural labor, petty trade, and self-employment. Most households will be able to meet both 
their food and non-food requirements. 
Urban areas 
Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes are expected to persist through January 2027, as poor households are 
anticipated to continue meeting their minimum food consumption needs but face increasing difficulty 
covering essential non-food expenditures. Elevated costs of living — including high prices for housing, 
transportation, and utilities — are expected to further erode household purchasing power and constrain access to 
non-food essentials. At the same time, reduced demand for casual labor is likely to intensify competition for limited 
income-earning opportunities among the urban poor. As a result, many households are expected to struggle to 
secure consistent employment and maintain sufficient income to meet their essential non-food needs. However, 
urban areas are likely to provide relatively better income-earning opportunities compared to rural areas, which helps 
improve the purchasing power of urban residents. 
Annex 1: Key sources of evidence used in this analysis 
Livelihoods profiles FEWS NET Qualitative Typical sources of food and income by 
livelihood zone 
El Nino Forecast NOAA Qualitative/
Report 
 
Crop and livestock 
production 
Ministry of Agriculture Quantitative 
and qualitative 
report 
Food availability: Crop production levels 
impact local food availability 
HEA Survival and 
Livelihoods 
protection deficits 
FEWS NET - September 
2025 
 Quantitative Household food access- Wealth groups 
and livelihood zones with food 
consumption gaps 
Food Consumption 
and livelihood coping 
Malawi Vulnerability 
Assessment Committee 
(MVAC) 
Quantitative Household food access and consumption 
Macro-economic 
situation 
The World Bank Report Trade deficit-Foreign reserves 
SGR and ADMARC 
stock levels 
Ministry of Agriculture, 
Irrigation and Water 
Development 
Quantitative/
Quantitative 
Food availability- Institutional stock levels 
Annex 2: FEWS NET’s analytical approach explained 
Early warning of acute food insecurity outcomes requires forecasting months in advance to provide decision makers with 
sufficient time to budget, plan, and respond to expected humanitarian crises. However, due to the complex and variable 
factors that influence acute food insecurity, definitive predictions are impossible. Scenario Development is a methodology 
that allows FEWS NET to meet decision makers’ needs by developing a “most likely” scenario of the future. 
FEWS NET’s scenario development process applies the Disaster Risk Reduction framework and a livelihoods-based lens to 
assess acute food insecurity outcomes. A household’s risk of acute food insecurity depends not only on hazards (such as 
drought) but also the household’s vulnerability to these hazards (e.g., the level of dependence on rainfed crop production 
for food and income) and coping capacity (which considers both the household’s ability to cope with a given hazard and the 
Evidence  Source Data format Food security element of analysis 
Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 7
use of negative coping strategies that harm future capacity). To evaluate these factors, FEWS NET bases this analysis on a 
strong foundational understanding of local livelihoods. FEWS NET’s scenario development process also accounts for the 
Sustainable Livelihoods Framework; the Four Dimensions of Food Security; and UNICEF’s Nutrition Conceptual Framework, 
and is closely aligned with the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) analytical framework. 
How does FEWS NET analyze current acute food insecurity outcomes? FEWS NET assesses the extent to which 
households can meet their minimum caloric needs. This analysis converges evidence of current food security 
conditions with available direct evidence of household-level food consumption and livelihood change. FEWS NET also 
considers available area-level evidence of nutritional status and mortality, focusing on whether these reflect the 
physiological impacts of acute food insecurity. FEWS NET uses the globally recognized five-phase Integrated Food 
Security Phase Classification (IPC) scale to classify current acute food insecurity outcomes, and the analysis is IPC-
compatible. In addition, FEWS NET applies the “!” symbol to designate areas where the mapped IPC Phase would 
likely be at least one IPC Phase worse without the effects of ongoing humanitarian food assistance. 
How does FEWS NET develop key assumptions underpinning the most likely scenario? A key step in FEWS NET’s 
scenario development process is the development of evidence-based assumptions about factors that affect food 
security. These include hazards and anomalies in food security conditions that will impact the evolution of household 
food and income during the projection period, as well as factors that may affect nutritional status. FEWS NET also 
develops assumptions about factors expected to behave normally. Together, these assumptions form the foundation 
of the “most likely” scenario. 
How does FEWS NET analyze projected acute food insecurity outcomes? Using the key assumptions that underpin 
the “most likely” scenario, FEWS NET projects acute food insecurity outcomes by assessing the evolution of households’ 
ability to meet their minimum caloric needs over time. FEWS NET converges expectations of the likely trajectory of 
household-level food consumption and livelihood change with area-level nutritional status and mortality. FEWS NET 
then classifies acute food insecurity outcomes using the IPC scale. Lastly, FEWS NET applies the “!” symbol to designate 
any areas where the mapped IPC Phase would likely be at least one IPC Phase worse without the effects of planned – 
and likely to be funded and delivered – food assistance. 
How does FEWS NET analyze humanitarian food assistance? Humanitarian food assistance – defined as 
emergency food assistance (in-kind, cash, or voucher) – may play a key role in mitigating the severity of acute food 
insecurity outcomes. FEWS NET analysts always incorporate available information on food assistance, with the caveat 
that such information can vary significantly across geographies and over time. In line with IPC protocols, FEWS NET 
uses the best available information to assess where food assistance is “significant” (defined by at least 25 percent of 
households in a given area receiving at least 25 percent of their caloric requirements through food assistance). In 
addition, FEWS NET conducts deeper analysis of the likely impacts of food assistance on the severity of outcomes, as 
detailed in FEWS NET’s guidance on Integrating Humanitarian Food Assistance into Scenario Development. 
Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 8
Annex 3: Seasonal calendar 
Annex 4: Events that would likely change projected acute food insecurity outcomes 
While FEWS NET’s projections are considered the “most likely” scenario, there is always a degree of uncertainty in the 
assumptions that underpin the scenario. This means food security conditions and their impacts on acute food security may 
evolve differently than projected. FEWS NET issues monthly updates to its projections, but decision makers need advance 
information about this uncertainty and an explanation of why things may turn out differently than projected. As such, the 
final step in FEWS NET’s scenario development process is to briefly identify key events that would result in a 
crediblealternative scenario and significantly change the projected outcomes. FEWS NET only considers scenarios that 
have a reasonable chance of occurrence. 
National 
Rainfall deficits associated with El Niño ar e more severe and prolonged than anticipated 
Likely impact on acute food insecurity outcomes: El Niño conditions delay the onset of the rainy season, followed 
by prolonged dry spells and below-average cumulative rainfall that are more severe than anticipated. Crop 
establishment and development would be significantly affected across southern and central Malawi. Reduced 
agricultural labor demands would further weaken the purchasing power of poor households. Expectations of lower 
national maize production would likely push maize prices above projected levels. Earlier depletion of food stocks and 
increased market dependence would widen food consumption gaps and accelerate the use of negative coping 
strategies. As a result, a greater proportion of poor households would likely experience IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) outcomes 
than projected under the most likely scenario. 
Source: FEWS NET 
Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 9
More severe-than-anticipated El Niño-induced rainfall deficits and extended dry spells 
Likely impact on acute food insecurity outcomes: Associated with El Niño, rainfall deficits more severe than 
currently anticipated and prolonged dry spells during critical crop growth stages would lead to widespread moisture 
stress, crop failure, and significantly below-average harvests across southern Malawi. Agricultural labor opportunities 
would decline substantially, reducing income among poor households already facing limited livelihood options. 
Lower local food availability, combined with atypically high staple food prices, would constrain food access during the 
lean season. Poor households would increasingly rely on unsustainable coping strategies, including distress sales of 
livestock, increased charcoal production, and reductions in meal quantity and quality. Consequently, food insecurity 
outcomes would deteriorate beyond current projections, with additional households facing IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) and 
the worst-affected households at risk of IPC Phase 4 (Emergency) outcomes. 
Tropical cyclone or localized flooding following prolonged dry conditions 
Likely impact on acute food insecurity outcomes: Although El Niño is expected to increase the likelihood of below-
average rainfall, isolated tropical cyclones or episodes of intense rainfall remain possible and could cause localized 
flooding, particularly in flood-prone districts of southern Malawi. Flooding would damage crops, displace households, 
destroy productive assets, and disrupt market access and transportation infrastructure. These impacts would 
compound existing production losses from rainfall deficits, reducing household food availability and income and 
constraining market access. Food consumption gaps would widen among affected households, increasing the 
number experiencing IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) or worse outcomes. 
Annex 5: FEWS NET’s Household Economy Analysis (HEA) Outcome Analysis (OA) 
To inform the June 2026 to January 2027 Malawi Food Security Outlook (FSO), FEWS NET conducted a Household 
Economy Analysis (HEA) Outcome Analysis (OA) to assess how access to food and cash income will be affected 
by ongoing and anticipated shocks. HEA OA is one of six direct food consumption outcome indicators in the IPC Acute 
Food Insecurity reference table and is used in FEWS NET’s convergence-of-evidence approach. It is the only outcome 
indicator that provides evidence of future outcomes. FEWS NET considers two main factors to assess the reliability of 
HEA OA results as direct evidence of food consumption: 
FEWS NET assessed that the information available to develop problem specifications for the Lower Shire Livelihood 
zone in Chikwawa district, Malawi, was substantial. The reference year for the baseline of the Lower Shire livelihood 
zone in Chikwawa district is April 2023 - March 2024, and FEWS NET assesses the baseline's current relevance as high. 
Based on these factors, FEWS NET has high confidence that the results of the HEA OA accurately present the size of 
food consumption deficits experienced by the population group of analysis. 
Problem specifications: The table below provides a broad overview of the quantity and price problem specifications 
(PS) behind the HEA OA. A PS translates a shock into household-level food security consequences through 
quantitative assumptions about the quantities and prices of key food and cash income sources during the projection 
period relative to levels documented in the reference year. While the OA assigns a point estimate to each key food 
and cash income source (e.g., maize, wheat, rice), the annex summarizes these points estimates into broader 
categories (e.g., main staple grains) and provides approximate ranges for a high-level summary. 
Results: As shown in the PS table, two sets of OA results are presented. Annual results are presented in graphs with 
three bars. The first (left) bar shows the relative importance of different food and cash income sources in the 
reference year (a typical year). The second (middle) bar shows the sources of food and cash income available in the 
year of analysis, after incorporating the impact of shocks and household coping capacity. This is compared against 
two thresholds shown in the third bar: the Survival Threshold and the Livelihoods Protection Threshold. Seasonal 
results are presented in a graph with multiple bars showing month-by-month results for the consumption year. This 
Likely accuracy of the problem specifications, which is largely dependent on the availability of credible 
information to estimate or make inferences about key sources of food and income. 
Relevance of the baseline to current livelihoods, which is often – but not always – tied to the age of the baseline. 
Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 10
is where FEWS NET derives results that inform projections of acute food insecurity outcomes over the eight-month 
FSO period. The Survival Threshold represents the costs of covering the minimum food needs (2,100 kilocalories per 
person per day) and other essential survival items (e.g., soap, salt, kerosene for cooking, water for consumption). The 
Livelihoods Protection Threshold represents the cost of the Survival Threshold plus the costs of maintaining 
livelihoods (e.g., commodities and services such as productive inputs, health, and education). 
Minimal 
(IPC Phase 1) 
Stressed 
(IPC Phase 2) 
Crisis 
(IPC Phase 3) 
Emergency 
(IPC Phase 4) 
Famine 
(IPC 
Phase 5) 
No livelihood 
protection 
deficit 
Small or moderate livelihood 
protection deficit <80% 
Livelihood protection deficit 
≥80%; survival deficit <20% 
Survival deficit 
≥20% but <50% 
Survival 
deficit 
≥50% 
Population group: OA is typically conducted across three to four wealth groups which are the population group of analysis, 
i.e., Very Poor (VP), Poor (P), Middle (M) and Better Off (BO) households. 
Description of scenario(s): 
FEWS NET conducted a countrywide OA for all 18 livelihood zones of Malawi. For illustrative purposes, FEWS NET 
selected the results of the MW05, Lower Shire Livelihood Zone in Chikwawa district, to be presented in this annex. As 
an input to the FSO analysis, FEWS NET conducted the OA based on the most likely scenario, and the PS and results 
for this scenario are summarized below. 
Problem specifications: 
Quantity produced or collected 
Crop production, including 
all area-specific key 
parameters among main 
staple grains, pulses, 
legumes, tubers, vegetables, 
fruits, etc. 
Maize grain – 51 to 
75% 
Other 
staple(sorghum) - 
76 to 100% 
Tubers (sweet 
potatoes)– 76 to 
100% 
Pulses (pigeon 
peas) - 150 to 
175% 
Legumes 
(groundnuts) - 76 
to 99% 
Other crops 
(vegetables) – 
100% 
Maize, sorghum, and groundnut production were below 
average, mainly due to prolonged dry spells. In contrast, 
pigeon peas, which are more drought-tolerant, performed 
better than most other crops. 
HEA OA outcome indicator thresholds with associated IPC Phases 
Food or income source 
Problem 
specifications Justification 
Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 11
Livestock and milk 
production, including all 
area-specific key parameters 
among camels, cattle, sheep, 
goats, etc. 
Livestock herd 
sizes (cattle) - 76 
to 99% 
Livestock herd 
sizes (goats) - 101 
to 125% 
Milk production - 
100% 
Cattle numbers declined slightly due to several consecutive 
years of low calving rates. However, goat numbers remained 
stable or increased, reflecting their greater resilience and 
tolerance to drought conditions. 
 
Other food and income 
sources including labor, 
petty trade, gifts/
remittances, wild foods, fish, 
typical social safety nets, and 
other 
Agriculture labor 
cultivation - 76 to 
99% 
Agriculture labor 
harvesting – 76 to 
99% 
Self-employment – 
100% 
Other (petty trade) 
– 100% 
Availability of agriculture labor for cultivation at the start of 
the 2026/27 season is expected to be reduced due to the 
upcoming El Niño which is expected to reduce cropped area 
for maize and other crops. Labor demand for harvesting 
was low following reduced crop production in the past 
season. 
Prices for items sold - income sources 
Crop production, including 
all area-specific key 
parameters among main 
staple grains, pulses, 
legumes, tubers, vegetables, 
fruits, etc. 
Main staple 
grains(maize)- 201 
to 250% 
Tubers (sweet 
potatoes) – 126 to 
150% 
Pulses (pigeon 
peas) - 126 to 
150% 
Other 
crops(Groundnuts) 
- 201 to 250% 
 
Prices increased due to below average crop production, 
above average production costs, high demand as well as 
persistent inflationary pressure. 
Livestock and milk 
production, including all 
area-specific key parameters 
among camels, cattle, sheep, 
goats, etc. 
Herd sizes (cattle) 
- 251 to 300% 
Herd sizes (goats) - 
301 to 350% 
Milk production - 
251 to 300% 
Livestock prices increased mainly due to inflationary 
pressure. 
Food or income source 
Problem 
specifications Justification 
Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 12
Other food and income 
sources including labor, 
petty trade, gifts/
remittances, wild foods, fish, 
and other 
Agriculture labor - 
301 to 350% 
Non-agriculture 
labor - 151 to 
175% Self-
employment - 351 
to 400% 
Other (petty trade) 
- 351 to 400% 
Wage rates and self-employment activity prices increased 
following inflationary pressure. 
 
 
Prices for items bought - food and basic non-food items 
Main staple grains and other 
staples (pulses, oils, etc.) 
Staple grains 
(maize) - 201 to 
250% 
Maize grain prices are projected to increase based on 
anticipated high demand, low supply and effects of 
inflationary pressure. 
Livelihood protection items 
that are key parameters, 
including all area-specific key 
parameters among 
agriculture inputs, health, 
education, and more 
Inputs (fertilizer) - 
176 to 200% 
Education and 
health - 176 to 
200% 
 
 
Prices increased for agricultural inputs, education and 
health following the impacts of inflation and increased fuel 
prices. 
Inflation (changes in inflation 
compared to reference year) 
176 to 200% Inflation increased following high forex premiums on the 
parallel market, low agricultural production, fuel price 
increases, and monetary policy challenges. 
Results: 
Recommended citation: FEWS NET. Malawi Food Security 
Outlook June 2026 - January 2027: Crisis (IPC Phase 3) 
anticipated in the south through January driven by weather 
shocks, 2026. 
Food or income source 
Problem 
specifications Justification 
Annual OA results 
Source: FEWS NET 
Seasonal OA results 
Source: FEWS NET 
Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 13
Food Security Outlook 
To project food security outcomes, FEWS NET develops a set of assumptions about likely events, their effects, and the probable responses of various actors. FEWS NET analyzes these 
assumptions in the context of current conditions and local livelihoods to arrive at a most likely scenario for the coming eight months. Learn more here. 
* FEWS NET classification is IPC-compatible with limited exceptions. IPC-compatible analysis follows key IPC protocols but does not necessarily reflect the consensus of national food security 
partners. As of IPC 3.0, the IPC no longer assesses the impact of food assistance on classification and thus no longer maps the (!). However, FEWS NET continues to produce food security 
maps inclusive of the (!) as well as maps compatible with IPC 3.0/3.1, which include the mapping of food security assistance bags. In rare cases, FEWS NET classification is IPC-aligned but 
not IPC-compatible. IPC-aligned analysis is evidence-based but some types of evidence required for IPC-compatibility were not available. 
Food Security Outlook June 2026 - January 2027
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 14