The US military said on Monday it completed its ninth consecutive night of strikes against Iran, targeting military infrastructure and strategic sites across Iran. 










ADVERTISEMENT














ADVERTISEMENT








In a post on X, US Central Command said it targeted "Iranian military command centres, air defence and coastal surveillance sites, maritime capabilities, missile and drone launch sites, and communications networks".


The latest attack came after Washington announced the 
death of three US service members.


Two were killed during an Iranian attack on a US base in Jordan, and another service member died in Iraq on Saturday during the "controlled detonation" of a downed Iranian drone.


"We'll see what happens but we hit them very hard again tonight," US President Donald Trump told reporters upon his return to Washington following the World Cup final, adding that the strikes were "in honour" of the "three great patriots".


On its end, Iran's IRGC said on Monday that it launched a "surprise attack" on an "enemy" command centre in Syria, state media reported. 


Meanwhile, Kuwait's army said it was responding to an Iranian attack. "Any explosions heard are a result of air defence systems intercepting the hostile attacks," it said in a statement on X. 


A day prior, Iran said it targeted two US bases in Kuwait. 


Bahrain also sounded its missile alert sirens Monday morning, warning of an incoming Iranian attack. 


Rubio says Iran using Hormuz as leverage


US Secretary of State Marco Rubio said on Sunday that Iran is using the Strait of Hormuz as leverage and urged other countries to "step up" pressure and share the burden to protect global shipping. 


"It's clear that Iran, at least some people in Iran, want to control the straits and hold that as leverage against the world," Rubio told reporters ahead of travelling to the Philippines for a meeting of foreign ministers with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).


Traffic in the strait has once again largely stalled amid the intensified fighting, driving Brent crude above $90 a barrel on Monday. The renewed hostilities erupted despite an interim ceasefire after Iran attacked ships transiting the strategic waterway.


"The United States will do and continue to do what it needs to, to protect global shipping, but other countries need to begin to step up and provide, whether it's hardware or finances, to help carry that burden," Rubio added.


The Secretary of State said Washington remains open to diplomacy, but that the deal must be "real" and one that Iran is "willing to live by".


"They can't have an MOU that's alive if they're violating the terms of it," Rubio said. "The United States always remains open to a diplomatic solution. We've tried multiple times with Iran, and we'll continue to try".


On Saturday, Iran’s Ayatollah Mojtaba Khamenei warned of “unforgettable lessons” if the US keeps attacking the Islamic Republic in a statement read on state-run TV.


Khamenei, who has not been seen in public since the war began, called Trump’s signature on the interim ceasefire deal “worthless and invalid".


His comments came hours after a negotiator said Tehran was suspending its commitments to the agreement.


In the past week, Trump threatened to target power stations and bridges to try to compel Iran to loosen its hold. Washington has also reimposed a naval blockade on Iranian ports to halt its shipments of crude oil.


US airstrikes on Saturday hit an electricity and desalination plant in Iran’s southern Hormozgan province, Iranian state TV reported.


The IRNA state news agency said the Bonji desalination plant was destroyed, cutting off water supplies to about 10,000 people, and that a desalination plant on the strategic Qeshm Island in the strait was damaged.


It reported that three bridges were hit Saturday, including one on a route to Bandar Abbas, Iran’s main port that sits near the narrowest part of the strait.