Good morning. The US has launched its 
third consecutive night of strikes on Iran
, hours after Donald Trump said Washington would reinstate a maritime blockade on the country and charge ships for safe passage. The UAE said two ⁠national tankers ⁠were ​targeted by two Iranian cruise missiles in ⁠the southern lane of the strait ⁠of Hormuz in Omani territorial ​waters, ‌killing one ‌Indian crew member and wounding ‌eight others, including four seriously.
Iran and the US are in theory nearly halfway through the 60-day period of an interim deal that was supposed to set up talks for a permanent end to the war, which began in February with the assassination of Iran’s supreme leader, Ali Khamenei. In reality, that deal has devolved into a series of attacks over the strait of Hormuz, resulting in the near-total collapse of an interim ceasefire and worrying world leaders that the conflict could fully resume.




How has Trump changed his position on tolls?
 On Monday, Trump said the US would demand a 20% tariff on all cargoes shipped through the strait of Hormuz. Until now, the US had said the strait should remain open to all without tolls – as it was before Washington and Israel attacked Iran on 28 February. Any attempt by the US or Iran – which has also proposed tolls – to charge fees would violate global norms on freedom of navigation and would be likely to cause further economic disruption far beyond the region.


Lindsey Graham’s sister appointed to serve rest of Republican’s Senate term
Darline Graham Nordone (centre): ‘I think this is what Lindsey would have wanted.’
 Photograph: Sean Rayford/AP
Henry McMaster, South Carolina’s governor, 
appointed Lindsey Graham’s sister
, Darline Graham Nordone, to replace him in the Senate after his death on Saturday, after Donald Trump recommended that she be given the role. Her appointment was welcomed by lawmakers from both parties, who saw Nordone as an appropriate replacement for the brother who had raised her after their parents died when she was a teenager.




What did Nordone say about her appointment?
 In brief remarks,
 
Nordone, 64,
 
said: “Lindsey has always been there for me, and now I will be there for him. I promise to work hard over the next several months to support the president and carry forward the efforts of my brother on behalf of the citizens of South Carolina and the United States. I think this is what Lindsey would have wanted, and I plan to honor him in this way. I miss you more than I can even put into words, but I’m going to do this. I got it.”


Rubio launches campaign to dismantle international criminal court
Marco Rubio wants to dismantle the international criminal court.
 Photograph: Eric Lee/Reuters
Marco Rubio, the US secretary of state, 
launched a campaign to dismantle the international criminal court
 (ICC) on Monday, claiming the global tribunal was interfering with US military and law enforcement operations at the risk of American sovereignty. Rubio invoked images of US border patrol agents and elected leaders being “dragged before an international court” and tried by judges from around the world.
“If we stand idle, all of them will be at the mercy of foreign judges, thousands of miles away – facing the constant risk of prosecution and even imprisonment for the so-called ‘crime’ of defending their own country,” Rubio said in a video.




What is the international criminal court?
 The international court, headquartered in The Hague, can only investigate crimes committed in states that are party to the Rome statute, the 2002 treaty that established it. The US has not ratified the treaty, nor has the court opened any investigations into alleged crimes committed on American soil.


In other news …
A sign honoring Alex Pretti and Renée Good.
 Photograph: Tim Evans/Reuters




Minnesota prosecutors have received 
long-withheld evidence on the fatal shootings
 of Renée Good and Alex Pretti
, helping the state gain clarity on the deaths that occurred earlier this year during protests against a federal immigration crackdown. Minnesota authorities had said earlier this year that the FBI was 
refusing to share evidence
 from its investigation into the shootings.




Mexico is to file criminal complaints
 over the killing of migrants 
by ICE in US
, with the president, Claudia Sheinbaum, saying Mexicans were “outraged” over the killing last week of Lorenzo Salgado Araujo by agents in Houston.




A US judge has 
nullified Trump’s deal
 to resolve his IRS lawsuit,
 in a scathing ruling that said the $10bn suit was brought for “improper purpose”.




Idaho is to have a 
ballot measure for a reproductive freedom law
 that would reverse a ban on abortions at all pregnancy stages, one of the strictest bans in the US.




Polish-Ukrainian solidarity over the Russian threat on their borders 
is being undermined
 by a bitter historical dispute over a second world war massacre.


Stat of the day: US refunds $81bn in Trump tariffs after supreme court ruled them illegal
Donald Trump talking about tariffs.
 Photograph: Carlos Barría/Reuters
The US government has already 
paid back tens of billions of dollars
 in tariffs it collected before the supreme court ruled them illegal, according to budget figures released on Monday.
Culture Pick: Why The Polygamist should be your next TV obsession
Gugu Gumede (left) as Joyce Gomora and Kwanele Mthethewa as Matipa in The Polygamist.
 Photograph: Netflix
With its lovable playboy and jaw-dropping twists, the South African drama has become Netflix’s latest breakout smash. 
Andrew Lawrence explains
 why you should get straight on it with a binge watch.
Don’t miss this: Sale of multimillion-dollar T rex skeleton is big headache for scientists
A videographer documents ‘Gus’ the T rex.
 Photograph: Timothy A Clary/AFP/Getty Images
One of the largest and most complete T rex skeletons discovered to date 
is to be auctioned by Sotheby’s in New York
 with an estimated sale price of $20m-$30m – and scientists are worried about the trend. Prof Richard Butler, a vertebrate paleontologist at the University of Birmingham in the UK, said: “Dinosaur fossils being marketed and sold like rare artworks at vast prices by auction houses is very concerning. A fossil not in a recognised museum collection cannot be studied and is therefore lost to research.”
… or this: Sam Neill remembered by his co-stars and neighbors
Sam Neill in 2023.
 Photograph: Brendon Thorne/Getty Images
There has been a huge outpouring of love for the late Sam Neill. Lindsay Duncan, Charles Dance and the director Peter Webber are 
among those who worked with him paying tribute
. To the small South Island communities in New Zealand near where he lived, he was 
beloved as “just a local”
. And if you missed it, his final interview – with Guardian readers – 
was one for the ages
.
Climate check: Trump dramatically cuts size of two national monuments held sacred by tribes
Lower Calf Creek Falls at the Grand Staircase-Escalante national monument in Utah.
 Photograph: Wolfgang Kaehler/LightRocket/Getty Images
Donald Trump has 
approved a sharp reduction
 in the size of two national monuments in Utah – Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante – held sacred by many Native Americans, in the latest move to open US public land to corporate developers and the oil and gas industry. The monuments have ancient cliff dwellings, petroglyphs and scenic canyons, as well as coal and uranium deposits that state officials want made available for development.
Last Thing: The lonely reality of male infertility – podcast
Sperm counts are in decline worldwide.
 Photograph: nevodka/Shutterstock
Sperm counts are in decline worldwide, and testosterone levels are said to be plunging, but male infertility still carries a stigma. 
Prof Michael Carroll speaks to Helen Pidd in this podcast
 on what every man should know.
Sign up
Sign up for the US morning briefing
First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, 
subscribe now
.
Get in touch
If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email 
newsletters@theguardian.com