The deadly Ebola outbreak in the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo
 can be stopped, the head of the World Health Organization has said, as he arrived in the country to support efforts to contain the disease.
Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus arrived in Kinsasha on Thursday and was due on Friday to travel to Ituri province in the north-east, 
where the outbreak was centred
.
“That thing can be stopped,” Tedros said in a message to Congolese citizens, adding that the WHO did not support travel bans because they “don’t help much”.
“Together, we will overcome this outbreak,” he said, promising to do “everything in my power to help”.
The WHO has recorded 10 confirmed and 223 suspected Ebola deaths in the DRC since the outbreak 
was declared on 15 May
, among more than 1,000 confirmed and suspected cases.
The true scale of the outbreak may be significantly larger, the WHO warned, saying the virus was believed to have circulated undetected for some time.
The outbreak is the 17th recorded Ebola epidemic in the vast central African country, which has a population of more than 100 million. The disease was first identified there in 1976.
Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus speaks to reporters in Kinshasa.
 Photograph: Arsene Mpiana/Reuters
Complicating relief efforts, the outbreak is centred on a mineral-rich region 
fought over by armed groups
. “Conflict and displacement make everything harder,” Tedros said. “I am making a direct appeal to all warring parties in this region: please declare a ceasefire. No cause, no conflict, no grievance is worth condemning innocent people to death from a preventable disease.”
More than 245,000 people have fled eastern DRC to neighbouring countries since January 2025, according to the 
UN refugee agency
. Armed groups operating in the area include the Rwanda-backed M23, which controls large parts of the North and South Kivu provinces south of Ituri.
Early symptoms of 
Ebola
 include fever, exhaustion, muscle pain, headaches and a sore throat. These can progress to vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, rash and impaired kidney and liver function.
The disease spreads through direct contact with blood or body fluids of an infected person or someone who has died from Ebola.
A man hangs an Ebola awareness banner in the Kigonze camp in Bunia.
 Photograph: Glody Murhabazi/AFP/Getty Images
The current outbreak has an estimated fatality rate of 24.6%, compared with an 
average of 50%
 across all Ebola outbreaks, 
according to the WHO
.
There is no approved treatment for the 
Bundibugyo strain of Ebola responsible for the current outbreak
. However, the WHO said on Thursday that its advisory groups had recommended clinical trials of vaccines and treatments. The head of the African Union’s health agency, Jean Kaseya, said a vaccine could be ready by the end of the year.
Neighbouring Uganda, which has recorded one Ebola death and six additional cases, announced it would immediately close its border with the DRC.
The 
WHO warned that border closures
 could drive informal crossings and make it harder to monitor and contain the disease.
Workers load WHO emergency supplies on to a UN plane in Nairobi, Kenya, as aid is rushed to eastern DRC.
 Photograph: Andrew Kasuku/AP
Meanwhile, Kenya’s high court temporarily suspended plans to establish a 
quarantine and treatment facility
 for affected US citizens in Kenya. The US had said it would deny entry to anyone infected with the disease.
The judge Patricia Nyaundi ruled that Kenya was not allowed to admit anyone exposed to or infected by Ebola under the proposed deal with the US until a case challenging the deal brought by the Kenyan rights group Katiba Institute was heard.
Health officials had warned that the proposal could place additional strain on Kenya’s already stretched healthcare system.
Ebola has killed more than 15,000 people in Africa over the past 50 years. The deadliest outbreak in the DRC claimed nearly 2,300 lives from 3,500 cases between 2018 and 2020.
The WHO said it had received 4.6 tonnes of aid at the airport in Bunia, the capital of Ituri. Unicef, the UN children’s agency, said it would send 100 tonnes of aid.
With Agence France-Presse and Reuters