Overview


At the end of June, overall conditions are positive for wheat, maize, rice, and soybeans. For wheat, spring wheat is wrapping up in the Northern Hemisphere as winter wheat harvest is progressing. In the Southern Hemisphere, sowing is continuing, albeit with reduced total sown areas expected. For maize, the harvest is proceeding in the Southern Hemisphere as dry conditions develop in parts of the Northern Hemisphere. Rice conditions are generally favourable; however, areas of concern are being watched in India and Thailand. For soybeans, sowing is wrapping up in the Northern Hemisphere.


Global crop condition map synthesizing information for all four AMIS crops as of June 28th. Crop conditions over the main growing areas for wheat, maize, rice, and soybean are based on a combination of national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. 
Crops under non-favourable conditions are displayed on the map using their crop symbols.


Crop Conditions at a Glance


Wheat
 – In the Northern Hemisphere, winter wheat harvesting is continuing. In the Southern Hemisphere, sowing is wrapping up under favourable conditions.


Maize
 – Harvesting is progressing in the Southern Hemisphere as dryness develops in parts of the Northern Hemisphere.


Rice
 – Conditions are generally favourable; however, a dry start to the Kharif season in India and the wet-season in Thailand are of concern.


Soybeans
 – In the Northern Hemisphere, sowing is progressing under generally favourable conditions.


Forecasts at a Glance


Climate Influences
 – El Niño conditions are present. This will likely be a high-impact event due to its early onset in June 2026 and strong or very strong conditions from September through November 2026 (84% chance).


Europe
 - As of early June, drought alerts were present across parts of central and eastern Europe, while drought warnings and watches were present across most countries. The July outlook shows likely above-average temperatures across the continent along with possible below-average precipitation over central Europe.


India
 - The July forecasts indicate likely below-average precipitation across most of the country alongside likely above-average maximum and minimum temperatures.


United States
 – The July precipitation forecast indicates likely above-average precipitation over northern New England, the central Rockies, the Great Basin, and the Southwest, while below-average precipitation is likely over southern Texas, western Washington, coastal Oregon, North Dakota, and the northern Corn Belt.


Wheat Conditions


In the 
EU
, winter wheat is under generally favourable conditions; however, dry soils in central Europe and heatwaves in western Europe might potentially reduce yield prospects. In 
Türkiye
, winter wheat harvesting is ongoing with above-average yields. In 
Ukraine
, winter wheat remains under favourable conditions away from the war front. In the 
Russian Federation
, winter wheat is under favourable conditions. Spring wheat sowing has been completed with a reduction in total sown area compared to last year. In 
Kazakhstan
, conditions are favourable for spring and winter wheat. In 
China
, winter wheat harvest is wrapping up as spring wheat continues to develop. In the 
US
, winter wheat harvest is progressing with below-average yields due to drought in the central and southern Plains. Spring wheat conditions are favourable. In 
Canada
, conditions are favourable as spring wheat sowing wraps up and winter wheat develops. In 
Australia
, sowing is wrapping up under mostly favourable conditions, and a noticeable decline in total sown area is expected compared to last year. In 
Argentina
, sowing is progressing at a good pace, albeit with some delays in the southern agricultural belt due to excess soil moisture.


Maize Conditions


In 
Brazil
, the harvest of the spring-planted crop (smaller season) is wrapping up as the harvest of the summer-planted crop (larger season) begins. In 
Argentina
, the harvest of the late-planted crop (smaller season) is progressing under favourable conditions. In the 
US
, conditions are favourable, with good emergence and silking. In 
Canada
, conditions are favourable, with good emergence. In 
Mexico
, harvest is ongoing for the autumn-winter crop (smaller season) while sowing of the spring-summer crop (larger season) continues. In 
China
, spring-maize (larger season) is under favourable conditions as sowing of summer-maize (smaller season) continues. In 
India
, sowing of the 
Kharif
 crop (larger season) is beginning under mixed conditions due to the slow progress of the Southwest Monsoon. In 
Indonesia
, the harvest of the wet-season crop is wrapping up as sowing of the dry-season crop continues. In the 
EU
, conditions have improved in southeastern Europe, while hot spells in western Europe could negatively affect yields. In 
Ukraine
, conditions are generally favourable, though soils are dry in the eastern and western regions. In the 
Russian Federation
, conditions are favourable.