GIEWS global information and early warning system on food and agriculture 
 
 
 
 
GIEWS Country Brief 
The Republic of Yemen 
 
Reference Date: 04-June-2026 
FOOD SECURITY SNAPSHOT 
• Harvesting of 2026 winter wheat and planting of 
sorghum crops nearing completion 
• Below-average cereal production estimated in 2025 
• Cereal import requirements forecast at near-average 
level in 2026 
• Acute food insecurity persists in 2026 despite 
stabilized food prices and macroeconomic situation 
Harvesting of 2026 winter wheat and planting 
of sorghum crops nearing completion 
Agricultural activities for the 2026 season are progressing under 
generally favourable weather conditions, although weather 
conditions have been mixed with intensified rainfall that triggered 
flash floods across southwestern parts of the country, with 
considerable impacts on communities and farmlands. Harvesting 
of the 2026 winter wheat finalized in April in the eastern Plateau 
and is still underway in the northern and central highlands, where 
above-average rainfall amounts in March supported crop 
development and vegetation conditions, pointing to near-average 
production prospects. Planting of the 2026 main rainfed sorghum 
crop has been completed in most highland areas, including the 
northern, central highlands and southern uplands, while sowing 
activities are still ongoing in some coastal areas. Although 
favourable seasonal rainfall between March and April 2026 
generally supported crop establishment and early development, 
below-average precipitation amounts are forecast in parts of the 
southern uplands and northern areas, which may constrain crop 
development in the affected areas. Furthermore, farmers 
continue to face constraints in accessing agricultural inputs, 
particularly fertilizers and fuel, due to high prices, amid the 
conflict in the Middle East that started in late February 2026. 
Below-average cereal production estimated 
in 2025 
Cereal production in 2025 is estimated at a below-average level 
of about 400 000 tonnes, due to prolonged dry weather 
conditions and high temperatures, which limited planted areas 
and reduced yields in rainfed areas. In addition, ongoing localized 
conflicts, high input costs and supply chain disruptions further 
undermined agricultural production.
GIEWS global information and early warning system on food and agriculture 
 
Cereal import requirements forecast at 
near-average level in 2026 
Cereal import requirements in the 2026 marketing year 
(January/December) are preliminarily forecast at a near-average 
level of 5.2 million tonnes. The country remains highly dependent 
on imports to meet its domestic consumption needs, as limited 
local production and protracted conflict continue to constrain local 
supply. According to the latest Yemen Food Security Update, 
food imports through the Red Sea remained at adequate levels 
as of March 2026, with cumulative import volumes during the first 
quarter of 2026 at about 28 percent above the same period in 
2025. This increase was largely supported by commercial wheat 
imports, the main staple commodity used for bread production. 
However, the recent escalation of regional conflicts has 
increased shipping and cereal costs, amid foreign exchange 
shortages. In March 2026, no fuel was imported through the Red 
Sea ports and fuel imports through the Southern route fell by 
about 60 percent below average. Fuel prices rose 11 to 
16 percent in April, followed by a further 24 percent hike, raising 
domestic transport and input costs, and constraining food access. 
Acute food insecurity persists in 2026 despite 
stabilized food prices and macroeconomic 
situation 
Retail prices of wheat flour increased sharply in most markets of 
the Government of Yemen (GoY) controlled areas between late 
2024 and July 2025, underpinned by the sustained depreciation 
of the Yemeni rial and high import and transport costs. Tighter 
Central Bank oversight stabilized the Yemeni rial at an average of 
YER 1 553/USD 1 in April 2026, representing a 55 percent 
year-on-year appreciation. This exchange rate stability kept 
staple food prices unchanged month-on-month and 22 to 
30 percent lower than in April 2025. In Hadramout Governorate, 
wheat flour prices reached a record high of about YER 1 300/kg 
in July 2025 before declining sharply in August, mainly reflecting 
the appreciation of the Aden-based Yemeni rial, which 
strengthened from an average of YER 2 800/USD 1 in July to 
about YER 1 660/USD 1 in early August following exchange rate 
stabilization measures in the government-controlled areas. 
 
However, deteriorating economic conditions continue to drive 
acute food insecurity across the country. In the GoY, staple food 
prices increased month-on-month in March 2026 due to higher 
insurance and transport costs linked to the conflict in the Middle 
East, fuel price increases and foreign currency shortages. In 
Sana'a Based Authorities-controlled areas, additional taxation in 
early 2026 further raised prices of staple foods, reducing 
households’ purchasing power. Ongoing localized conflicts, 
supply disruptions and currency depreciation continue to 
constrain food access and disrupt markets and livelihoods. 
 
According to the 2026 Humanitarian Needs and Response 
Plan (HNRP), about 18.3 million people nationwide were 
projected to face high levels of acute food insecurity 
(IPC Phase 3 [Crisis] or above) between September 2025 and 
February 2026, including 5.5 million people in IPC Phase 4 
(Emergency).The latest IPC analysis indicates that, in the GoY, 
nearly 5 million people faced acute food insecurity between 
March and May 2026, including 1.4 million in IPC Phase 4 
(Emergency). Between June and September 2026, the number of
GIEWS global information and early warning system on food and agriculture 
 
acutely food insecure people is projected to increase to 
5.4 million (51 percent of the analysed population), including 
1.6 million people in IPC Phase 4 (Emergency). 
 
Disclaimer: The designations employed and the presentation of material in this 
information product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the 
part of FAO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of 
its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
 
This brief was prepared using the following data/tools: 
FAO/GIEWS Country Cereal Balance Sheet (CCBS) 
https://www.fao.org/giews/data-tools/en/. 
FAO/GIEWS Food Price Monitoring and Analysis (FPMA) Tool 
https://fpma.fao.org/. 
FAO/GIEWS Earth Observation for Crop Monitoring 
https://www.fao.org/giews/earthobservation/. 
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) https://www.ipcinfo.org/.