www.reach-initiative.org 1 
 
Research Terms of Reference 
Multi Sector Needs Assessment 
UKR2609 
Ukraine 
May 2026 
 
1. Executive Summary 
 
A. General information  
Country of 
intervention Ukraine 
Type of Emergency □ Natural disaster X Conflict □ Other (specify) 
Type of Crisis □ Sudden onset   □ Slow onset X Protracted 
Mandating Body/ 
Agency 
Humanitarian Country Team (HCT), Inter-Cluster Coordination Group (ICCG), 
OCHA 
IMPACT Project 
Code 
64BAO, 64BAG 
Overall Research 
Timeframe (from 
research design to 
final outputs / M&E) 
 
04/05/2026 to 15/12/2026 
Research 
Timeframe 
Add planned 
deadlines  
1. Data Analysis Plan (DAP) sent for 
validation: 11/05/2026 
7. Preliminary presentation/dissemination 
events: 04/09/2026 
2. Pilot/training (CATI): 08/06/2026 to 
12/06/2026 
8. MSNI analysis sent for validation:  
04/09/2026 
3. Start data collection: 15/06/2026  9. Bulletin sent for validation: 30/11/2025 
4. Data collected: 27/07/2026 10. Bulletin published: 15/12/2026 
5. Clean dataset sent for validation: 
17/08/2026 
11. Other (specify): _ _/_ _/_ _ _ _ 
6. Data analysis sent for validation: 
31/08/2026 
 
Humanitarian 
milestones 
Specify what will the 
assessment inform 
and when  
e.g. The shelter 
cluster will use this 
data to calculate PiN 
numbers for the 
HNO analysis 
Milestone Deadline 
X Donor plan/strategy 12/2026 
X Inter-cluster plan/strategy 10/2026 
X PiN calculation / HNO  09/2026 
□ IPC (Integrated food security Phase Classification) _ _/_ /_ _ _ 
X Cluster plan/strategy  11/2026 (TBD) 
□ NGO platform plan/strategy  _ _/_ _/_ _ _ _ 
□ Other (Specify): _ _/_ _/_ _ _ _ 
Audience type Dissemination
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 2 
 
Audience Type & 
Dissemination 
Specify who will the 
assessment inform 
and how you will 
disseminate to 
inform the audience 
X  Strategic 
X  Programmatic 
□  Operational 
□  [Other, Specify] 
X General Product Mailing (e.g. mail to NGO consortium; 
HCT participants; Donors) 
X Cluster Mailing (Education, Shelter and WASH) and 
presentation of findings at next cluster meeting  
X Presentation of findings (e.g. at HCT meeting; Cluster 
meeting)  
X Website Dissemination (Relief Web & REACH Resource 
Centre) 
□ [Other, Specify] 
Detailed 
dissemination plan 
required 
X Yes □ No 
General Objective 
To inform the planning, prioritization, and strategic decision-making of 
humanitarian actors in Ukraine by providing a robust evidence base for the 2027 
Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan (HNRP) through the conduct of a 
representative household-level assessment in selected frontline priority areas within 
the Government-Controlled Areas (GCA) of Ukraine, measuring the magnitude and 
complexity of multi-sectoral humanitarian needs. 
 
Specific 
Objective(s) 
1. To assess the needs of households across priority areas of Ukraine in 
key humanitarian sectors, including Shelter and Non-Food Items (SNFI), 
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH), Food Security and Livelihoods, 
Education, Health, and Protection. 
2. To analyze variations in the prevalence and severity of humanitarian 
needs among different demographic groups across the surveyed areas, 
highlighting sociodemographic, as well as displacement-specific 
vulnerabilities. 
3. To identify geographic variations in the prevalence and severity of 
needs across sectors, identifying oblasts and frontline/border regions 
where needs are most acute to inform targeted humanitarian 
interventions. 
4. To identify the main drivers and co‑occurrence of humanitarian needs 
by location and population group, including the role of service 
disruption, displacement, and socioeconomic vulnerability. 
5. To gather data on accountability to affected populations (AAP), 
including assistance preferences, satisfaction levels, perceived reliability 
of information sources, and  use offeedback and complaint 
mechanisms. 
6. To examine changes in humanitarian needs over time in relation to the 
previous rounds of MSNA data collection.  
7. To provide analytical outputs to inform sectoral People in Need (PiN) 
estimates, intersectoral severity analysis, and strategic planning for the 
2027 Ukraine HNRP. 
8. To strengthen the evidence base supporting humanitarian 
prioritization, including the identification of the most vulnerable
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 3 
 
households in proximity to the front line and the most vulnerable 
sub‑groups among internally displaced persons (IDPs), in line with 
evolving humanitarian priorities. 
Research 
Questions 
1. What are the unmet essential needs of households across the sectors of 
shelter and non-food items, water, sanitation and hygiene, food 
security, education, health, livelihoods, and protection? 
2. What is the variation in the prevalence and severity of humanitarian 
needs among different household demographics and displacement 
groups across the surveyed area? 
3. What are the geographic differences in the prevalence and severity of 
needs in each sector between the assessed regions and in front 
line/border areas?   
4. What are the affected populations' preferences for aid types and 
modalities, their satisfaction with humanitarian assistance, and 
challenges with aid information and voicing feedback? 
Geographic 
Coverage 
Frontline oblasts of Ukraine that are adjacent to the front line or bordering the 
Russian Federation: Chernihivska, Dnipropetrovska, Donetska, Kharkivska, 
Khersonska, Mykolaivska, Odeska, Sumska, and Zaporizka Oblasts, with the 
exception of households in settlements not under control of the Government of 
Ukraine as of shortly before the envisioned start date of the data collection (15 June 
2026). There are very limited settlements in Luhanska Oblast which are under the 
control of the Government of Ukraine which are excluded from this assessment.  
 
Secondary data 
sources 
2025 REACH Ukraine Multi-Sector Needs Assessment – General Population Dataset 
2025 REACH Ukraine MSNA General Population Frequency Tables at National level  
2025 REACH Ukraine MSNA General Population Frequency tables at Macro-region 
level  
2025 REACH Ukraine MSNA General Population Frequency tables at Frontline 
Oblast level  
2025 REACH Ukraine MSNA General Population Frequency Tables at Strata level  
2026 REACH Ukraine Calibration Assessment Round 4 Frequency Tables at Strata 
level 
2025 REACH Ukraine MSNA Overview of Humanitarian Needs  
2026 REACH Ukraine Humanitarian Situation Monitoring (HSM) 
2026 REACH Ukraine Joint Market Monitoring Initiative (JMMI)1 
2026 Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan (HNRP) 
2025-2026 OCHA Ukraine Situation Reports 
2026 IOM Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) 
2025 Ukraine UNFPA Subnational Population Statistics 
 
More detailed information can be found under Point 3.3 Secondary Data Review in 
the Methodology section.  
B. Sampling 
Population groups □ IDPs in camp □ IDPs in informal sites 
 
1 Forthcoming.
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 4 
 
Select all population 
group which your 
assessment will 
collect data on 
X IDPs in host communities X IDPs [Other, Specify] 
□ Refugees in camp □ Refugees in informal sites 
□ Refugees in host communities □ Refugees [Other, Specify] 
X Host communities (including 
non-displaced conflict-affected 
populations) 
X Returnees (IDPs and refugees) 
Structured 
questionnaire 
(Quantitative) –  
 
Select all the apply  
X Probability sampling  □ Non - Probability sampling  
Data collection 
level: 
X Individual  X Household 
X Settlement □ Other (specify): _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
If probability sampling 
Sampling method:         X  Random sampling       □  Cluster sampling  
The sampling is stratified:             X  Yes          □  No  
If yes what are the stratifications:  
° Geographic:  
• Frontline and border oblasts: three strata - (i) oblast center, (ii) areas within 50km of the 
frontline or border, and (iii) areas beyond 50km. 
• For those oblasts which lie predominantly within the 50km zone, the oblast and the oblast center 
are the two strata (i.e., Donetska, Khersonska and Zaporizka Oblasts).  
• Odeska Oblast, given its unique geographic location to the front line, is stratified accordingly: 
Odesa (admin-4) and Odeskyi (admin-2) without Odesa.  
 
° Population groups: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
° Other:_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ _  
 
What is the Primary sampling unit (PSU): Household 
If cluster sampling, what is the mininum cluster size? _ _ _ _ _  
 
Sampling frame: 
Do you have the population number at PSU level for all population groups?       X Yes         □ No  
 
Selection:  
Probability Proportional to Size (PPS) :             □  Yes          X  No  
Selection of PSUs with replacement? :             □  Yes          X  No  
 
Aimed precision at stratification level: 
95% level of confidence 
5 to 8 +/- % margin of error 
Buffer: 5 %
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 5 
 
Total sample size: (Target #): 4,580 
Resampling: 
Do you have a reserve list of PSUs / households in case of inacessible area ?          □  Yes        X  No  
 
Data collection method:              □  Face to face X  Remote data collection 
If non-probability sampling 
Sampling method:              □  Quota sampling                 □  Purposive                   □  Snowballing 
The sampling is stratifed:                     □  Yes               □  No  
If yes what are the stratifications: 
° Geographic:_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
° Population groups: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
° Other:_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ _  
 
If quota sampling, what characteristics will be used as quota?: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
 
Data collection method       □  Face to face                       □  Remote data collection 
C. Questionnaire 
Questionnaire 
design 
 
MSNA mandatory indicators 
All the mandatory indicators from the MSNA indicator bank, have been included 
without alteration:       □  Yes         X  No  
XLSform for mandatory indicators 
The kobo questionnaire provided for the mandatory indicators was used without 
alteration:      □  Yes          X  No  
Data management 
platform(s) X  IMPACT                           □  UNHCR                       X  Other, Specify (HDX) 
Expected ouput 
type(s) 
X MSNA Bulletin #: 1  
X Presentation (Preliminary findings) #: 6  
X Interactive dashboard #: 1 
□ Report #: _ _ 
□ Profile #: _ _ 
X Presentation (Final) #: 1 
□ Webmap #: _ _ 
□ Factsheet #: _ _ 
□ Map #: _ _ 
X Brief/Situation overview #: 1 
Data publication 
plan 
X Final (anonymised) dataset public, available on REACH resource center     
X Final (anonymised) dataset public, through HDX connect 
X Analysis table public, available on REACH resource center  
□ Analysis table public, available on HDX
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 6 
 
Visibility Specify 
which logos should 
be on outputs 
REACH 
Donor: Department of State, FCDO 
Coordination Framework: Humanitarian Country Team (HCT), Inter-Cluster 
Coordination Group (ICCG) and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
Partners: Kyiv International Institute of Sociology ( KIIS) 
 
2. Rationale  
 
2.1 Background  
 
Four years after the escalation of the war in Ukraine since February 2022, the humanitarian crisis has become 
increasingly protracted, while continuing to evolve in scale, severity, and geographic distribution. As of early 
2026, an estimated 3.9 million people remain internally displaced across Ukraine, 2 while and estimated of 4.2  
million people have returned to their areas of origin,3 and 5.76 million refugees from Ukraine have been recorded 
globally.4 The overall context is now characterized by prolonged displacement, repeated shocks, and eroded 
coping capacities. Humanitarian needs remain persistent, although continue to shift in response to changes in 
front lines, patterns of attacks, and access to services. According to the 2026 Humanitarian Needs and Response 
Plan (HNRP), an estimated 10.8 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance.5  
 
Active hostilities persist across northern, eastern, and southern oblasts, with continued shelling, missiles, and 
drone attacks reported throughout late 2025 and early 2026. These dynamics have resulted in ongoing civilian 
casualties and sustained damage to housing, infrastructure, and productive assets.6 Recurrent attacks on energy 
systems and other critical infrastructure continue to disrupt the provision of essential services, including 
electricity, heating, water supply and sanitation, healthcare, and education.  The 2025–2026 winter season was 
particularly severe, with cold temperatures, repeated attacks on the energy network, and eroded household 
resources compounding vulnerabilities and exacerbating humanitarian needs.7 In this context, many households 
face overlapping and compounding vulnerabilities, particularly during winter periods and in areas close to the 
front line.8 
 
Findings from REACH’s 2025 Multi-Sector Needs Assessment (MSNA) highlight the persistence of humanitarian 
needs across the country, with a large proportion of households experiencing sectoral needs and a significant 
share facing acute or extreme deprivatio ns in frontline areas .9 Additional evidence collected through the 
Calibration Assessment in the beginning of 2026  points to sustained conditions in key sectors, particularly 
livelihoods, health, and access to services.10 The protracted nature of the crisis in these areas has deepened pre-
existing socioeconomic vulnerabilities, with livelihoods erosion, limited access to services, and protection risks 
continuing to drive humanitarian needs most severely among those who were most vulnerable before the full-
scale invasion (e.g., older households and households with a member with a disability).  Despite their protracted 
nature, the nature and severity of needs are not static  nor monolithic: they vary across geographic areas and 
 
2 IOM, Internal Displacement Report — General Population Survey Round 23 (May 2026)  
3 IOM, Returns Report — General Population Survey Round 23 (May 2026)  
4 UNHCR, Operational Data Portal Ukraine Refugee Situation, Situation Ukraine Refugee Situation (accessed May 06 2026) 
5 OCHA, Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2026 (January 2026)  
6 UN, Ukraine violence ‘worse than ever’, Security Council hears , March 2026 
7 IOM, Ukraine — The Cost of Winter in Ukraine: Household Heating Costs, Utility Disruptions and Compounded Vulnerabilities in 2025-2026 , May 2026 
8 NRC, Ukraine: Families in the firing line, March 2026  
9 REACH, Ukraine Multi-Sector Needs Assessment – General Population Dataset, September 2025 
10 REACH, Ukraine Calibration 2026 – Dataset, March 2026
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 7 
 
population groups and are influenced by ongoing displacement dynamics  and repeated and new exposure to 
shocks.  
 
The humanitarian response environment has been further affected by continued reductions in funding 
throughout 2025 and into 2026, compounded by the ongoing effects of shifts in major donor priorities. These 
funding challenges have had direct implications for the operational capacities of Humanitarian Clusters, 
international and national NGOs, and Ukrainian civil society organizations (CSOs) , leading to reductions in 
staffing, scale-back of activities, and gaps in the delivery of assistance across sectors such as cash assistance, 
health, water, sanitation and hygiene , protection, food security and livelihoods, and shelter. Further, the 
humanitarian community has continued to operate under a prioritised framework within the 2026 HNRP, 
focusing available resources on the most critical needs, including: (i) supporting the most vulnerable populations 
in frontline areas, (ii) facilitating safe and timely evacuations, (iii) delivering rapid assistance in the aftermath of 
strikes, and (iv) addressing the needs of the most vulnerable displaced populations. 
 
Against this backdrop of a protracted yet evolving crisis, characterized by sustained high levels of need, reduced 
funding capacities, and a prioritised humanitarian response, REACH Ukraine will implement the 2026 MSNA at 
the request of the Humanitarian Country Team (HCT), in collaboration with the Inter-Cluster Coordination Group 
(ICCG) and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), to generate updated, 
robust, and actionable evidence on humanitarian needs and vulnerabilities to support response planning. 
 
2.2 Intended impact  
 
The 2026 MSNA aims to provide comprehensive and representative multi -sectoral data on the evolving 
humanitarian situation in the frontline areas in  Ukraine to inform strategic decision -making by the HCT, ICCG, 
and Humanitarian Clusters and relevant Working Groups. It will further support the programmatic planning and 
operational prioritisation of international and national humanitarian actors. As in previous years, the MSNA 
constitutes a central evidence base for humanitarian planning in Ukraine and is expe cted to directly inform the 
development of the 2027 HNRP, including People  in Need (PiN) estimations, severity analysis, and geographic 
targeting. 
 
Building on previous rounds, the assessment will collect data at settlement, household and individual levels to 
measure the prevalence and severity of humanitarian needs, as well as to better understand their underlying 
drivers in a protracted crisis context. It will examine how needs differ across geographic areas and among key 
population groups, including by gender, age, disability status, household composition, and displacement status. 
Particular attention will be paid to capturing variations in needs am ong different groupings of the  conflict-
affected population, including IDPs, returnees, and non-displaced households residing in high-risk areas. 
 
The MSNA will also continue to integrate components related to Accountability to Affected Populations (AAP), 
including preferences for assistance modalities, levels of satisfaction with aid, and barriers to accessing services, 
information, and feedback mechanisms. This component is especially critical in the context  of constrained 
resources, where understanding prioritisation, coverage gaps, and perceived effectiveness of assistance is 
essential. 
 
In recognition of both the protracted nature of the crisis and the evolving patterns of vulnerability, the 2026 
MSNA will contribute to strengthening the evidence base underpinning humanitarian prioritisation. It will 
provide granular insights into needs in frontline and border areas, as well as detailed analysis of the severity and
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 8 
 
drivers of needs among displaced and otherwise conflict-affected populations, with the aim of supporting more 
targeted, efficient, and equitable humanitarian action. 
 
The 2026 MSNA builds on the approach and learning from the 2022, 2023 and 2024 2025 Ukraine MSNA and is 
conducted in close collaboration with the HCT and ICCG, and in alignment with UN OCHA. 
 
3. Methodology 
 
3.1 Methodology overview  
 
The 2026 MSNA  will utilize a quantitative methodology to collect  mostly household-level data through 
randomized Computer-Assisted Telephone Interview (CATI) surveys. This approach involves trained enumerators 
conducting structured interviews via mobile phone with respondents selected through Random Digit Dialing 
(RDD). The sampling strategy is designed to achieve a 95% confidence level, with margins of error ranging from 
approximately 5% to 8% depending on the achieved sample size within each stratum. As in previous years, 
REACH will subcontract data collection to the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology (KIIS), ensuring adherence 
to REACH’s data quality standards and ethical protocols. In total, approximately 4,580 household interviews will 
be conducted. 
 
The sample design is based on 22 strata , listed in the Sampling summary table in Section 3.4 ,  across nine 
frontline oblasts of Ukraine: Chernihivska, Dnipropetrovska, Donetska, Kharkivska, Khersonska, Mykolaivska, 
Odeska, Sumska, and Zaporizka. Within these oblasts, stratification reflects both geographic proximity to the 
frontline or the border with the Russian Federation and key urban centres. Specifically, strata are defined as: 
• Oblast centres (i.e., Chernhiv, Dnipro, Kharkiv, Kherson, Mykolaiv, Odesa, Sumy and Zaporizhzhia); 
• Areas located within 0 to50 kilometres of the front line or border with the Russian Federation (excluding 
centres where applicable); 
• Areas located beyond 50 kilometres from the frontline or border (excluding centres where applicable). 
 
While a base target of approximately 158 completed interviews per stratum is applied which includes a 5% buffer, 
selected strata are intentionally oversampled to increase analytical coverage in frontline raions (admin -2) 
affected by significant depopulation. Direct raion -level representativity is not feasible under current 
demographic conditions, particularly in heavily depopulated frontline raions. To mitigate this limitation, the 
sampling approach incorporates targeted oversampling across relevant strata, thereby increasing the likelihood 
of capturing sufficient observations within frontline raions without formally stratifying at that level. The targeted 
oversampling to provide a predicted raion -level representativity was determined by estimated population 
distributions according to the most recent update to the 2022 Government of Ukraine census provided by the 
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) Common Operational Dataset on Population Statistics (COD -PS) 
published in summer 2025.  
 
Based on such feasibility assessments, approximately 11 out of 23 frontline raions are expected to be reliably 
covered, with up to 16 potentially captured under favourable conditions. A limited number are unlikely to reach 
sufficient sample sizes. Raion-level analysis will only be conducted where adequate data is available, and in some 
cases neighbouring raions may be used as analytical proxies, with appropriate caveats.
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 9 
 
The 2026 MSNA depl oys this oversampling approach because t here is a potential misalignment between the 
units of analysis for the 2027 HNRP (which continues to emphasize distance to the front line and/or border with 
the Russian Federation) and the reporting requirements of OCHA, as well as key funders which continue to report 
at the raion-level (admin-2). Given the additional consideration that strata selection is designed to facilitate the 
sampling of homogeneous units according to particular criteria , which for the 2026 MSNA in Ukraine s hould 
consider proximity to hostilities, the 2026 MSNA deploys such an approach to meet these competing needs.  
 
As a result, the survey design is expected to ensure representativity at the following levels: 
• Oblast level (admin-1); 
• 0–50 km and 50+ km zones within oblasts; 
• Oblast centres (admin-4); 
• A majority of frontline raions on a probabilistic basis, where sufficient observations are captured. 
 
 
Results should be interpreted as representative at the stratum level, assuming sufficient mobile phone coverage 
and response rates. Aggregated estimates will be produced by pooling relevant strata to generate oblast -level 
and cross-strata indicators. As such, the precision of estimates will vary depending on effective sample sizes, but 
will fall within the 5–8% margin of error range at the 95% confidence level. The 2026 MSNA will report on raion-
level if the margin of error falls below 11%.   
 
To ensure alignment between the achieved  sample and population distributions, REACH will apply post -
stratification weighting. This will draw on: 
• the most recent United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) Common Operational Dataset on Population 
Statistics (COD-PS); 
• 2022 settlement-level population statistics published by the Government of Ukraine prior to the full -
scale invasion. 
 
Settlement-level figures  from the 2022 census  will be updated using raion -level population change factors 
derived from COD-PS, enabling the construction of a calibrated population baseline. Survey weights will then 
adjust for unequal probabilities of selection resulting from stratification and oversa mpling, as well as for 
geographic population distribution. 
 
The sampling approach does not allow for representative inference for specific population subgroups, such as 
internally displaced persons or returnees. While results will be disaggregated by sociodemographic 
characteristics and geographic variables , these findings should be interpreted as indicative due to reduced 
effective sample sizes. 
 
The results are analyzed  according to various geographies and demographics .11 Geographic analyses include 
oblast-level and strata-specific disaggregations. Furthermore, the analysis results are disaggregated to highlight 
variations across other geographies (e.g.,, urban/rural, 20 -kilometres and 21 -50 kilometres distance from the 
front line and border with the Russian Federation) and sociodemographic groups ( e.g., age and gender 
composition of the household, type of caregiver household size, presence of members with disability, 
households with children, income levels, etc.).  
 
 
11 See 3.5 Data Processing and Analysis section of the current ToR.
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 10 
 
The analysis will be conducted through two complementary analytical frameworks : (i) the Multi-Sector Needs 
Index (MSNI), developed by IMPACT Initiatives to assess the severity of humanitarian needs across sectors;  (ii) 
the Contextualized Composite Indicator Analysis (CCIA), developed by REACH Ukraine to capture context -
specific patterns of need severity and previously applied to the 2025 MSNA. 
 
3.1.1 Key definitions 
 
• Government-controlled areas: Areas that are under the control of the Government of Ukraine (GoU ) 
at the time of the sampling, as monitored by LiveUA.  
• Areas beyond the control of the  GoU: Areas/territories of Donetska, Dnipropetrovska, Kharkivska, 
Khersonska, Luhanska, Sumska, and Zaporizka occupied by the Russian Federation at the time of 
sampling, as monitored by LiveUA, and the Autonomous Republic of Crimea.   
• Non-frontline oblasts: Oblasts that do not have any part of their territory located within 50 kilometres 
of the front line or the border with the Russian Federation.  These oblasts 
include: Cherkaska, Chernivetska, Ivano-Frankivska, Khmelnytska, Kirovohradska, Kyiv, Kyivska, Lvivska, 
Poltavska, Rivnenska, Ternopilska, Vinnytska, Volynska, Zakarpatska, and Zhytomyrska.  
• Frontline oblasts: Oblasts that have a part of their territory  located within 50 kilometres of the  front 
line or the border with the Russian Federation.  These oblasts include:  Chernihivska, Dnipropetrovska, 
Donetska, Kharkivska, Khersonska, Mykolaivska, Odeska, Sumska, and Zaporizka Oblasts. 
• Oblast centers: Oblast centers refer to the administrative capital or main city of an oblast. They typically 
serve as the political, economic, and administrative hub of the oblast, hosting regional government 
institutions and offering a concentration of services, infrastr ucture, and population compared to other 
areas within the same oblast.   
• 50-kilometre zone: This category includes settlements where any  portion lies within 50  kilometres of 
the front line and/or the border with the Russian Federation. The 50-kilometer zone was selected based 
on the contextual relevance of humanitarian needs to proximity to hostilities . While the 20-kilometre-
zone is prioritized most in the humanitarian response, this zonage provides a sufficient population size 
for representative sampling. Further, d ata from Humanitarian Situation Monitoring (HSM) has 
shown that within this zone, humanitarian needs tend to increase with proximity to the frontline or 
border.12 REACH Ukraine utilizes  front line data one week before the beginning of data collection  for 
the definition of the  50-kilometre zone  (expected timeline: 15 June 2026), allowing for  accurate GIS 
adjustments.   
• Household member: Those who are currently present in the household. Those household members 
who are temporarily absent are not included when respondents are considering their responses to 
questions, as well as family members. Family members in the military are also not incl uded in the 
household if they are no longer residing in the household. However, the income of family members in 
the military are included if income continues to be pooled at the household from those serving in the 
Ukrainian Armed Forces but residing away from the household.  
• Head of Household: A person who makes decisions on behalf of the entire household. The MSNA 
interviews respondents who either 1) report serving as the head of household or 2) report they are able 
to answer on behalf of the head(s) of household. The Ukraine MSNA allows for two heads of household 
to be selected.  
• Internally Displaced Person (IDP): Persons or groups of persons who have been forced or obliged to 
flee, or to leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in particular as a result of or in order to 
avoid the effects of armed conflict, situations of generalised violence, violations o f human rights or 
 
12 REACH, Four years of evolution from emergency monitoring to frontline (April 2026).
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 11 
 
natural or human -made disasters, and who have not crossed an internationally recognised State 
border.13 In Ukraine, IOM Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) operationalizes this definition by 
categorizing as IDPs those that moved from their city/village of permanent place of residence because 
of the full-scale war.14 For this assessment, REACH aligns its IDP category with this definition and creates 
a separate category labelled “households displaced within settlements“ to capture those who have been 
displaced but not outside of their city/village. The dominant focus of the MSNA is those IDPs which have 
been displaced at any point beginning from 24 February 2022 beyond their settlement.  
• Returnee: A person who had undergone a migratory movement and returned to their original place of 
habitual residence.15 REACH aligns with the definition operationalized by the  IOM which requires that 
returnees have left the place of their habitual residence since February 24th, 2022 due to the current war 
for a minimum of 2 weeks (14 days). Returnees are not restricted only to IDPs, but can also include those 
who were displaced internationally.   
• IDP household: IDP households refer to those households that have at least one head of household 
who is an IDP. 
• General population: This refers to all individuals/households residing in Ukraine without reference to 
any specific characteristic.  
• Computer assisted telephone interview (CATI) surveys: In this method, questions are displayed 
through an application or software (e.g., Kobo) on an electronic device such as a mobile or computer 
screen, which the interviewer then reads to a respondent over a phone call and enters the respondent’s 
answers directly into the electronic advice. The MSNA utilizes Kobo.  
• Household: The MSNA considers a household to be a small group of persons who share the same living 
accommodation, who pool some, or all, of their income and wealth and who consume certain types of 
goods and services collectively, mainly housing and food. It excludes househol d members who are 
temporarily absent from the home for six months or more, including children who are absent, as well as 
members who serve in the military and do not live at home.  
• Critical infrastructure: Schools and education facilities (including scientific institutions), markets and 
grocery stores, railway, road, bridges, wastewater infrastructure (e.g. pipes, treatment facilities, 
buildings, etc.), water infrastructure (e.g. pipes, treatment facilities,  buildings, etc.), district heating 
stations, gas stations and gas supply network, government buildings, fire stations, industrial facilities, 
power stations/facilities and electricity supply network, health facilities and pharmaci es, warehouses, 
humanitarian aid distribution centres, telecommunications infrastructure.   
 
3.2 Population of interest  
 
The points below outline the geographical area and population assessed as well as unit of measurement.  
• Geographical area assessed: Overall, the MSNA aims to cover nine frontline oblasts: Chernihivska, 
Dnipropetrovska, Donetska, Kharkivska, Khersonska, Mykolaivska, Odeska, Sumska, and Zaporizka 
Oblasts, excluding the households not under the control of the Government of Ukraine.  
• Population assessed: The general population residing in the assessed areas. While the assessment 
does not conduct stratification by demographic groups, results are disaggregated by key 
demographic characteristics during the analysis stage.  
• Unit of measurement: The unit of measurement is the household. The MSNA will include an 
individual module on employment, health and education indicators measured at the individual level. 
 
13 IOM, Glossary on Migration  (2019).  
14 IOM, Methodological Note: General Population Survey Ukraine (August 2023).  
15 IOM, Glossary on Migration  (2019).
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 12 
 
At times, households are prompted to answer questions on their community or area of residence , 
as well (i.e., settlement).  
 
3.3 Secondary data review  
 
Source Relevance Usage 
IMPACT 2026 MSNA Indicator Bank  The MSNA Indicator Bank constitutes 
IMPACT Initiatives guidance on core 
MSNA sectoral indicators  
To inform the questionnaire’s 
indicators and design. 
REACH Ukraine 2025 MSNA Data 
Analysis Plan  
The Data Analysis Plan lists the 
indicators measured through the 2025 
MSNA.  
To inform the methodology and 
questionnaire design for the 2025 
MSNA.  
2025 REACH Ukraine Multi-Sector 
Needs Assessment – General Population 
Dataset  
  
The General Population Dataset gathers 
the data collected through the 2025 
MSNA on the general population of 
Ukraine.  
Where possible, to conduct 
comparative and trend analysis 
between MSNA rounds.  
2025 REACH Ukraine MSNA General 
Population Frequency Tables at National 
level  
 
2025 REACH Ukraine MSNA General 
Population Frequency tables at Macro-
region level  
 
2025 REACH Ukraine MSNA General 
Population Frequency tables at Frontline 
Oblast level  
 
2025 REACH Ukraine MSNA General 
Population Frequency Tables at Strata 
level  
  
The MSNA frequency tables show the 
results of the analysis of core MSNA 
indicators across multiple sectors: 
Displacement, Education, Food Security, 
Livelihoods, Health, Protection, Shelter 
and NFI, WASH, and Accountability to 
Affected Populations. The frequency 
tables are available at four different 
geographical levels: National, Macro-
region, Oblast, and Strata.   
To provide contextual data on 
general populations’ multi-sectoral 
needs, triangulate and compare 
findings between MSNA rounds.   
2026 REACH Ukraine Humanitarian 
Situation Monitoring (HSM)  
Provides detailed information on 
humanitarian needs and service access 
in conflict-affected settlements in 
Ukraine within the 0-50 kilometre zone.  
Inform assessment methodology, 
including questionnaire and 
sampling design, verify/triangulate 
primary data and findings and try 
to compare trends over time. 
2026 REACH Ukraine Calibration 
Assessment Round 4 – Dataset 
2026 REACH Ukraine Calibration 
Assessment Round 4 – Frequency Tables 
at Strata level 
2026 REACH Ukraine Calibration 
Assessment Round 4 – Frequency Tables 
Frontline Oblasts  
The report presents the results of the 
Calibration Assessment Roud 4, 
providing an update on multisectoral 
needs as of January 2026. 
To inform analysis, emerging 
trends, seasonal drivers of 
vulnerability and needs across 
sectors in 2026.
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 13 
 
2026 REACH Ukraine Joint Market 
Monitoring Initiative (JMMI)16 
JMMI reports track prices and 
availability of commodities, market 
dynamics in Ukraine, and inform cash-
based humanitarian responses within 
the 0-50 kikometre zone. 
To facilitate context analysis and 
triangulate primary data collected 
by different research cycles.  
2026 Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and 
Response Plan (HNRP) 
 
 
 
The 2026 HNRP provides an overview of 
the impact of the war on the people of 
Ukraine, the most pressing humanitarian 
needs, the estimated number of people 
who need assistance. It outlines the 
strategy to ensure adequate and timely 
humanitarian response.  
Aid understanding of the context, 
informs assessment methodology, 
including questionnaire and 
sampling design. 
2025-2026 OCHA Ukraine Situation 
Reports 
Compilation of latest information 
concerning the humanitarian situation in 
Ukraine.  
To enhance understanding of the 
context and key definitions, 
corroborate primary data, and 
validate findings through 
triangulation. 
2026 IOM Displacement Tracking Matrix 
(DTM) 
 
Tracks displacement trends and provides 
information on conflict-affected 
displaced groups in Ukraine.  
Aid understanding of the context, 
specifically in relation to 
displacement. 
2025 Ukraine UNFPA Subnational 
Population Statistics 
 
Restricted dataset on population 
statistics disaggregated by geographic 
and demographic groups. The dataset is 
updated annually in the summer to 
allow for more accurate weighting. 
To generate survey weights for the 
MSNA dataset.  
REACH Ukraine  
UNHCR Ukraine Quarterly Operational 
Updates  
UNICEF Ukraine Situation Reports  
WFP Ukraine Situation Reports  
ACAPS Ukraine Special Reports  
 
Compilation of latest information 
products from UN Agencies and INGOs 
on the humanitarian situation in 
Ukraine. 
To enhance understanding of the 
context and key definitions, 
corroborate primary data, and 
validate findings through 
triangulation. 
Cluster reports  Compilation of Clusters and NGO 
partners’ reports on sectoral and 
localized needs.  
To triangulate primary data and 
findings on sectoral and localized 
needs.  
 
3.4 Primary Data Collection  
 
3.4.1 Method 
 
The MSNA will include approximately 4,5 80 household-level CATI interviews conducted across nine frontline 
oblasts of Ukraine. The CATI methodology was selected over face -to-face (F2F) data collection due to its cost - 
and time -efficiency, alignment with the approach used in the 2025 MSNA, and its ability to safely access 
households in frontline and border areas – which are increasingly the focus of the humanitarian response – 
without exposing enumerators to security risks. 
Data collection will be implemented by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology (KIIS), under the oversight of 
REACH. KIIS brings substantial operational capacity and extensive experience in CATI implementation, having 
 
16 Forthcoming.
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 14 
 
conducted data collection for multiple MSNA and HSM cycles, as well as previous assessment rounds in Ukraine. 
As a long-standing REACH partner, KIIS is fully familiar with REACH methodologies, data quality standards, and 
ethical protocols.  In parallel, REACH will ensure technical oversight of the process, including correct 
implementation of the s ampling design, and data quality monitoring. KIIS enumerators will be trained in 
accordance with REACH standards to ensure consistency in implementation. Data colle ction is planned to take 
place over a five-week period from 15 June to 27 July 2026, following a one-week training period, which includes 
testing and piloting. 
 
3.4.2 Sampling 
 
The MSNA 2026 will adopt a probability -based sampling methodology using stratified random sampling. The 
sampling design has been developed to balance operational constraints, including timeline, budget, and access 
limitations, with the need to generate a robust and policy -relevant evidence base for the 202 7 Humanitarian 
Needs and Response Plan (HNRP). 
The sampling framework covers nine frontline oblasts , namely Chernihivska, Dnipropetrovska, Donetska, 
Kharkivska, Khersonska, Mykolaivska, Odeska, Sumska, and Zaporizka, and is structured around 22 strata defined 
by geographic proximity to the frontline or the border with the Russian Federation, as well as key urban centres. 
These strata include: 
• Oblast centres; 
• Areas located within 0–50 kilometres from the frontline or border (excluding centres where applicable); 
• Areas located beyond 50 kilometres from the frontline or border (excluding centres where applicable). 
A baseline target of approximately 158 completed interviews per stratum is applied, with selected strata 
deliberately oversampled to improve analytical coverage in frontline areas, particularly regarding raion (admin-
2) representativity.  
Direct raion-level representativity is not feasible under current conditions  given the depopulation of certain 
frontline raions, which a stagnant frontline has exacerbated. As such, the sampling strategy incorporates targeted 
oversampling across strata to increase the probability of capturing observations from frontline raions without 
explicitly stratifying at that level. The estimation of the oversample is based off updated settlement-level statistics 
through the same approach described above for weighting the dataset. 
This approach is expected to ensure representativity at: 
• Oblast level (admin-1); 
• 0–50 km and 50+ km zones within oblasts; 
• Oblast centres (admin-4); 
• A majority of frontline raions on a probabilistic basis, where sufficient observations are captured. 
While approximately 11 out of 23 frontline raions are expected to be reliably represented, coverage could extend 
to up to 16 raions under favourable conditions. A limited number of raions are unlikely to reach sufficient sample 
sizes. Consequently, raion-level analysis will only be conducted where adequate data is available, and findings 
for specific raions should be interpreted with caution. 
Given the CATI RDD methodology, results are considered representative at the stratum level, assuming adequate 
mobile phone coverage and response rates. Aggregated estimates will be produced by pooling relevant strata 
to generate oblast-level and cross-strata indicators. The margin of error will vary depending on effective sample 
sizes, but is expected to fall within the range of approximately 5% to 8% at a 95% confidence level, with the 2026 
reporting on the raion level when the margin of error falls below 11%.
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 15 
 
Map 1: Sampling approach 
 
Map 2: Sampling approach with odds of raion representativity
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 16 
 
 
Households covered by the 2026 MSNA are located exclusively in nine frontline oblasts of Ukraine: Chernihivska, 
Dnipropetrovska, Donetska, Kharkivska, Khersonska, Mykolaivska, Odeska, Sumska, and Zaporizka. Within these 
oblasts, the sampling framework applies stratified random sampling, with strata defined based on proximity to 
the front line or the border with the Russian Federation, as well as the inclusion of key urban centres. 
Specifically, strata are defined based on proximity to the frontline or the border with the Russian Federation, as 
well as the inclusion of selected oblast centres. These include: (i) areas located within the 0–50 km zone; (ii) areas 
located beyond 50 km, where applicable; and (iii) oblast centres, where these are treated as distinct strata. 
In Donetska Oblast, given the limited accessibility and the concentration of the surveyed population  in 
Kramatorsk, a single stratum covering the accessible areas is applied. In Khersonska and Zaporizka Oblasts, where 
the majority of territory lies within the 0–50 km zone, two strata are defined: the oblast centre and the remainder 
of the oblast within the 0 –50 km zone, with no 50+ stratum included. In contrast, in oblasts such as 
Dnipropetrovska, Kharkivska, Sumska, Chernihivska, and Mykolaivska, where both frontline-proximate and more 
distant populations are accessible, stratification distinguishes between 0–50km areas, 50+ km areas, and, where 
relevant, oblast centres. 
In Odeska oblast, stratification is not based on distance to the frontline, but instead distinguishes between the 
city of Odesa and Odeskyi (admin-2). Given the shape of Odeska Oblast and the particularities of its geography 
in relation to the ongoing conflict, Odesa (admin-4) and Odeskyi (admin-2) with the oblast centre removed were 
preferred as the two sampling units, over Odesa and Odeska (admin-1). 
Oblast centres sampled as distinct strata include Chernihiv, Dnipro, Kharkiv, Kherson, Mykolaiv, Odesa, Sumy, 
and Zaporizhzhia. These cities are treated separately to prevent large urban populations from disproportionately 
influencing estimates for surrounding areas, particularly within the 0–50 km zones or broader oblast-level strata. 
While no dedicated sample of internally displaced persons (IDPs) is drawn, previous CATI -based assessments 
indicate that a substantial number of IDP households are likely to be included in the sample, particularly within 
frontline oblasts. As such, finding s related to IDPs may provide useful insights and, in some cases, approach 
acceptable levels of precision; however, they should not be assumed to be fully representative.  Any 
disaggregation by displacement status will therefore be treated as indicative and interpreted with caution. 
The target sample size is approximately 158 completed interviews per stratum, with larger allocations in selected 
strata to support oversampling. This results in a total sample of approximately 4,580 household interviews across 
22 strata. At the stratum level, this corresponds to a 95% confidence level, with margins of error generally ranging 
from approximately 5% to 8% depending on achieved sample sizes. A buffer of approximately 5% is included to 
account for interviews that may be excluded following data quality checks. 
The primary sampling unit is the household. Samples are drawn within each stratum using Random Digit Dialing 
(RDD), whereby mobile phone numbers are randomly generated based on operator prefixes and remaining 
digits. Enumerators conduct multiple call attempts at different times and on different days to maximise response 
rates. Data collection is implemented through a call centre operated by KIIS with guidance and monitoring from 
REACH ensuring standardized procedures, supervision, and adherence to establish ed data quality and ethical 
standards.
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 17 
 
Sampling summary table:  
 
Stratification Confidence 
level 
Error 
margin 
Buffer Sample size Sampling 
type 
Chernihivska – Chernihiv (oblast 
center) 
95% 5-8% 5% 158 Probability 
Chernihivska – 50 kilometer zone 95% 5-8% 5% 300 Probability 
Chernihivska – Beyond 50 kilometer 
zone minus Chernihiv 
95% 5-8% 5% 300 Probability 
Dnipropetrovska – Dnipro (oblast 
center) 
95% 5-8% 5% 158 Probability 
Dnipropetrovska – 50 kilometer 
zone 
95% 5-8% 5% 180 Probability 
Dnipropetrovska – Beyond 50 
kilometer zone minus Dnipro 
95% 5-8% 5% 180 Probability 
Donetska – Donetska 95% 5-8% 5% 158 Probability 
Kharkivska – Kharkiv (oblast 
center) 
95% 5-8% 5% 158 Probability 
Kharkivska – 50 kilometes zone 
minus Kharkiv 
95% 5-8% 5% 334 Probability 
Kharkivska – Beyond 50 kilometer 
zone 
95% 5-8% 5% 334 Probability 
Khersonska – Kherson (oblast 
center) 
95% 5-8% 5% 158 Probability 
Khersonska – Khersonska minus 
Kherson 
95% 5-8% 5% 180 Probability 
Mykolaivska – Mykolaiv (oblast 
center) 
95% 5-8% 5% 158 Probability 
Mykolaivska – 50 kilometer zone 
minus Mykolaiv 
95% 5-8% 5% 158 Probability 
Mykolaivska – Beyond 50 kilometer 
zone 
95% 5-8% 5% 158 Probability 
Odeska – Odesa (oblast center) 95% 5-8% 5% 158 Probability 
Odeska – Odeskyi minus Odesa 95% 5-8% 5% 158 Probability 
Sumska – Sumy (oblast center) 95% 5-8% 5% 158 Probability 
Sumska – 50 kilometer zone minus 
Sumy 
95% 5-8% 5% 359 Probability 
Sumska – Beyond 50 kilometer zone 95% 5-8% 5% 359 Probability 
Zaporizka – Zaporizhzhia (oblast 
center) 
95% 5-8% 5% 158 Probability 
Zaporizka – Zaporizka minus 
Zaporizhzhia 
95% 5-8% 5% 158 Probability 
Total sample size 4,580 
 
3.4.3 Tools 
 
The 2026 MSNA  will utilize a quantitative household survey instrument developed based on the existing 
framework applied in previous MSNA rounds, building on lessons learned and refinements introduced in 2024 
and 2025. The questionnaire incorporates the majority of mandatory (Tier 1) indicators from the MSNA Indicator 
Bank, with targeted adaptations to better reflect the Ukrainian context and evolving humanitarian priorities. In
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 18 
 
particular, adjustments were made within the Protection and Shelter sections to ensure relevance to current 
operational realities. These revisions were undertaken in close consultation with key stakeholders involved in the 
Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan (HNRP), including 13 Clusters and Technical Working Groups. Partners 
were provided with the opportunity to review and provide detailed feedback on the draft questionnaire to ensure 
alignment with sectoral information needs. 
While the Kobo questionnaire template provided by IMPACT HQ for mandatory indicators was reviewed, the 
MSNA Ukraine team opted not to adopt it in its original format. Instead, a tailored Kobo XLSForm is used, 
supported by customized data cleaning and analysis scripts that have been refined over three consecutive MSNA 
cycles. This adapted tool is designed to improve data accuracy, streamline processing, and ensure consistency 
with Ukraine -specific methodological requirements. A detailed list of indicators th at have been removed, 
modified, or added is provided in the technical annex.  However, variable names align with those provided by 
IMPACT HQ.  
Enumerators contracted by KIIS will undergo a five -day training prior to data collection. The training will cover 
what IMPACT is, the purpose of the assessment, the structure of the questionnaire, the rationale behind each 
module, and detailed guidance on response options, with particular emphasis on modules identified as 
challenging in previous rounds, including displacement, income and expenditure, and food secu rity indicators. 
The training combines theoretical sessions with practical exercises using the Kobo tool. Enumerator readiness 
will be assessed through a knowledge test and the completion of two pilot interviews prior to the start of data 
collection. Both must be completed successfully to proceed with data collection.  
During data collection, the REACH Data Team will conduct regular quality assurance checks, monitoring key 
indicators such as interview duration, call patterns, response consistency, and logical coherence of responses. 
Findings from these checks will be sys tematically documented and shared with KIIS focal points on a weekly 
basis. The Data and Assessment Teams will jointly review identified issues and determine appropriate corrective 
actions based on their frequency and severity. In addition, enumerators wil l be able to provide structured 
feedback directly within the Kobo tool, including observations related to questionnaire design, respondent 
comprehension, or contextual factors affecting the interview. 
In the event that target sample sizes are not achieved in specific strata due to elevated non -response rates or 
access constraints, KIIS will intensify call -back procedures using the Random Digit Dialing (RDD) system, 
including repeated attempts at differe nt times and days. Given the CATI -based methodology, it is anticipated 
that sufficient coverage will be achieved in most strata. However, in cases where persistent challenges arise , 
particularly in areas close to the frontline, REACH will assess feasible mitigation measures, including adjustments 
in fieldwork intensity or extended data collection periods , as well as combining strata. Any deviations from the 
planned sampling approach, as well as their implications for representativity and analysis, will be transparently 
documented during the data processing and reporting stages. 
 
3.5 Data Processing & Analysis 
 
Once the data collection is completed, primary data collected through Kobo will be exported to Excel and utilized 
by REACH for data processing. REACH Data Teams will keep a log of any changes, aligning to IMPACT’s Minimum 
Standards Checklist for Data Cleaning and Processing for Structured (Quantitative) Data  17 as well as IMPACT’s 
Data Protection SoPs. Data cleaning will involve verifying logical consistency through cross -checks during data 
 
17 Internal document.
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 19 
 
collection, ensuring that metadata is complete, appropriately recoding “other” responses, and removing all 
personal or identifying information from the dataset.  
 
Primary data collected through the 2026 MSNA will be analyzed to assess the overall state of humanitarian needs 
across sectors, geographies and demographic grou ps, identify key drivers of vulnerability, and map common 
need profiles. During the analysis phase, sampling weights will be applied to different strata to ensure that the 
sample more adequately reflects the population distribution, based on UNFPA’s most updated COD-PS data. 
 
The 2026 MSNA data will be processed using two analysis frameworks: (i) the Multi-Sector Needs Index, and 
the (ii) Contextualized Composite Indicator Analysis (CCIA)  framework. The 2026 Multi-Sector Needs Index 
framework18 will be developed by IMPACT Initiatives to facilitate the analysis and comparison of crisis-level data 
across sectors and humanitarian operations , using standard indicators to compare crises across contexts . The 
CCIA was developed by REACH Ukraine in 2024 in collaboration with Clusters, Working Groups, and Areas of 
Responsibility, to measure the magnitude and complexity of humanitarian needs in Education, Food Security, 
Health, Livelihoods, Protection, SNFI, and WASH. It was then updated in 2025. The CCIA is specifically tailored to 
the Ukrainian context, with localized indicators and dimensions that reflect the unique characteristics of the crisis 
to facilitate dissemination of findings. 
 
Both analysis frameworks classify households based on the severity of humanitarian needs into five categories: 
None/Minimal (1), Stress (2), Severe (3), Extreme (4), and Extreme (4+). A household is considered in need if it 
scores above 3, and in extreme need if it scores 4 or higher. The final severity score is based on the highest 
sectoral severity experienced by the household.  
 
The critical indicators and dimensions analysed through the CCIA include: 
 
• Education: capturing information about children’s school attendance, schooling modalities, reasons for 
not accessing formal school, education disruption events, and the presence of a conducive environment 
to education.  
• SNFI: shelter type, capturing proportion of HHs living in safe and dignified dwellings, proportion of HHs 
living in functional domestic space, conflict damage and non -conflict related shelter issues, security of 
tenure, types of electricity and heating, interruptions to main utility services, and access to essential non-
food items.  
• WASH: capturing information about access to sufficient quantity of drinking water, primary sources of 
drinking water, access to improved water sources, water -fetching time, treatment of water, types and 
safety of sanitation facilities used, access to technical water, hygiene and access to hygiene NFIs.  
• Food security: capturing Food Consumption Score (FCS) and Reduced Coping Strategy Index (rCSI), 
Economic Capacity to Meet Essential Needs (ECMEN)  
• Livelihoods, Cash and markets:  capturing information about households’s primary income sources, 
income quantity, utilization of livelihood coping strategies (LCS), estimation of monthly expenditure per 
capita, and debt repayment challenges.  
• Health: capturing information about the proportion of households with health needs, forgone care, 
disability and chronic conditions, barriers to accessing healthcare and medicines, and distance to the 
nearest medical facility.  
 
18 Forthcoming.
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 20 
 
• Protection: capturing information on exposure to conflict events, safety and security incidents , key 
concerns in relation to housing/property/land, inability to access legal assistance and social and 
administrative services, and child separation.  
 
The findings will be disaggregated to highlight variations across administrative  and geographic specifications 
(urban/rural, strata, distance from the frontline and border with the Russian Federation), as well as  
sociodemographic criteria. Nevertheless, given the small sample size, the analysis based on such disaggregations 
will be only indicative. Key disaggregations will include: 
• HHs with at least one member with a reported or registered disability: HHs with a member with a 
disability, HHs without a member with a disability 
• Displacement status of head of household: IDP HHs, Intra -settlement displaced HHs, Non -displaced 
HHs, Returnee HHs 
• Age of HH members: Mixed HHs (both 60+ and under), Non-elderly HHs, Elderly HHs. 
• HH size: Single HH member, HHs with 2-4 members, HHs with 5+ members 
• Rural/urban: Rural HHs, Urban HHs 
• By 50-km proximity to the Frontline / border with the Russian Federation: HHs living in settlements away 
from the frontline or Russian border, HHs living in settlements close to the frontline or Russian border.  
• By presence of children: HHs with children (HH member <18 years old), HHs without children 
• By caregiving status: Household without children, Multiple adults with children, Single female adult with 
children, Single male adult with children 
• By income per capita: HHs in 0 -25% income quartile, HHs in 25 -50% income quartile, HHs in 50 -75% 
income quartile, HHs in 75-100% income quartile 
• By head of household type: Joint-headed households, Single-headed female households, Single-headed 
male households 
• By gender of respondent: Men-respondent, Women-respondent 
• By age of respondents: 18-29 y.o. respondents, 30-44 y.o. respondents, 45-59 y.o. respondents, 60+ y.o. 
respondents. 
 
3.6 Limitations 
The 2026 MSNA faces several limitations related to its data collection modality and sampling strategy. The use 
of CATI interviewing, while cost -effective and enabling access to hard -to-reach areas near the front  line, may 
introduce coverage bias by underrepresenting households without reliable access to mobile phones. This 
includes, for example, older individuals, populations living in remote areas, and households in frontline 
settlements affected by disruptions t o telecommunications infrastructure. In addi tion, CATI surveys are less 
suited to lengthy questionnaires, as the absence of face-to-face interaction can contribute to respondent fatigue, 
increased non-response rates, and incomplete interviews. To mitigate these risks, the MSNA questionnaire has 
been streamlined and structured to ensure an average completion time of approximately 45 to 60 minutes, 
including the use of shorter and more focused sectoral modules. 
As data collection will be implemented by KIIS rather than REACH enumerators, REACH will have reduced direct 
control over fieldwork operations. This may introduce risks related to data quality and consistency. To address 
this, REACH will maintain strong oversight through the implementation of comprehensive data quality assurance 
mechanisms, including regular monitoring of interview patterns, logic checks, and systematic review of incoming 
data. In addition, REACH will hold regular coordination meetings with KIIS to review progress, address challenges, 
and ensure adherence to established protocols.
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 21 
 
While the assessment is designed to achieve a 95% confidence level, the margin of error varies across strata, 
generally ranging from approximately 5% to 8% depending on achieved sample sizes. The survey is 
representative at the stratum level and supports aggregation to oblast level, as well as to 0–50 km and 50+ km 
zones where applicable. However, due to the stratified design and the use of targeted oversam pling, precision 
will differ across geographic aggregations. Furthermore, the approach does not guarantee full representativity 
at the raion level; although the sampling strategy increases the likelihood of capturing data from frontline raions, 
coverage remains partial and probabilistic. 
The sampling design does not include dedicated samples for specific population groups, such as IDPS. While a 
substantial number of IDP households are expected to be captured, any analysis disaggregated by displacement 
status should be considered indicative rather than statistically representative. The same applies to other 
population subgroups, including households with specific vulnerabilities, given the reduced effective samp le 
sizes when disaggregating the data. 
Finally, differences between MSNA geographic classifications and those used by other actors (e.g. OCHA 
definitions of frontline areas or proximity zones) may lead to discrepancies in interpretation. These differences 
will be clearly documented and communic ated during analysis and dissemination to support coherent inter -
agency use of the findings. 
 
4. Key ethical considerations and related risks 
The proposed research design meets / does not meet the following criteria: 
The proposed research design…  Yes/ No Details if no (including mitigation) 
… Has been coordinated with relevant stakeholders to avoid 
unnecessary duplication of data collection efforts? Yes  
… Respects respondents, their rights and dignity (specifically 
by: seeking informed consent, designing length of survey/ discussion 
while being considerate of participants’ time, ensuring accurate 
reporting of information provided)? 
Yes  
… Does not expose data collectors to any risks as a direct 
result of participation in data collection? Yes  
… Does not expose respondents / their communities to any 
risks as a direct result of participation in data collection? No 
Respondent telephone numbers will be 
requested during the interview in case 
of a need to clarify responses during 
cleaning or conduct follow-up data 
collection. However, respondents will 
first be informed of how their number 
will be used and stored and their 
numbers will only be collected if they 
provide their consent. To mitigate the 
risk of exposure of personally 
identifiable data, IMPACT SOPs for 
management of such information are 
followed. In addition, respondents are
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 22 
 
not asked sensitive political or 
ideological questions that could put 
them at risk or make them feel 
uncomfortable. 
… Does not involve collecting information on specific topics 
which may be stressful and/ or re-traumatising for research 
participants (both respondents and data collectors)? 
No 
The assessment includes questions on 
vulnerability, income, disability, 
healthcare needs, exposure to conflict, 
main safety and security incidents 
affecting the households, any of which 
can be sensitive for a respondent and 
trigger potential feeling of shame 
and/or discomfort of respondent. Risk 
is mitigated by careful phrasing of the 
questions and adding an option to 
refuse to answer. In addition, 
enumerators are trained on how to 
approach sensitive topics during 
interviews. 
… Does not involve data collection with minors i.e. anyone less 
than 18 years old? Yes  
… Does not involve data collection with other vulnerable 
groups e.g. persons with disabilities, victims/ survivors of 
protection incidents, etc.? 
No 
While vulnerable groups are not 
purposefully sampled as part of this 
assessment, Heads of households 
(HoH) or household members that are 
interviewed could represent an at-risk 
group. Respondents have the right to 
refuse the whole interview or answer 
specific questions. In addition, 
enumerators will be trained on ethical 
considerations and referral and 
reporting mechanisms 
… Follows IMPACT SOPs for management of personally 
identifiable information? Yes
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 23 
 
5. Roles and responsibilities 
 
Table 3: Description of roles and responsibilities 
Task Description Responsible Accountable Consulted Informed 
Research design Senior Assessment 
Officer, Assessment 
Officer 
Research 
Manager 
Research 
Department at 
IMPACT HQ, 
Deputy 
Country 
Coordinator 
13 HNRP 
stakeholders 
Supervising data 
collection 
Senior Assessment 
Officer, Assessment 
Officer, Senior Data 
Officer 
Research 
Manager 
  
Data processing 
(checking, cleaning) 
Senior Data Officer, 
Data Officer, GIS 
Officer, Senior 
Assessment Officer, 
Assessment Officer  
Research 
Manager 
  
Data analysis Senior Data Officer, 
Data Officer, GIS 
Officer, Senior 
Assessment Officer, 
Assessment Officer  
Research 
Manager 
Research 
Department at 
IMPACT HQ, 
Deputy 
Country 
Coordinator 
13 HNRP 
stakeholders 
Output production Senior Assessment 
Officer, Assesment 
Officer 
Research 
Manager 
  
Dissemination Senior Assessment 
Officer, Assessment 
Officer  
Research 
Manager 
  
Monitoring & Evaluation Senior Assessment 
Officer 
Research 
Manager 
  
Lessons learned Senior Data Officer, 
Data Officer, GIS 
Officer, Senior 
Assessment Officer, 
Assessment Officer 
Research 
Manager 
  
 
Responsible: the person(s) who executes the task 
Accountable: the person who validate s the completion of the task and is accountable of the final output or 
milestone
MSNA - UKR_2609, May 2026 
 
www.reach-initiative.org 24 
 
Consulted: the person(s) who must be consulted when the task is implemented 
Informed: the person(s) who need to be informed when the task is completed 
6. Data Analysis Plan 
 
Available on the IMPACT Document Repository platform at this link.