Good morning. The US launched a 
ninth night of strikes
 targeting Iran early Monday, after announcing the death of another American service member – the third in recent days. Donald Trump said the new attacks were “in honor” of the US dead. The Iranian supreme leader, Mojtaba Khamenei, warned of “unforgettable lessons” if the US kept attacking.
Trump has threatened to target Iran’s power stations and bridges to try to compel Tehran to loosen its hold on the strait of Hormuz. Last week the US reimposed a naval blockade on Iranian ports. On Saturday, the military said it had redirected six ships and disabled one since then. Oil prices rose at the opening of trading in Asia on Monday, with the price of Brent crude climbing 2.72% to $90.50 a barrel.




Where have US service personnel been killed?
 The service member was killed on Saturday in northern Iraq during a controlled detonation of what was called unexploded ordnance on a downed Iranian attack drone. It was the third US death in recent days, after two military service personnel were killed in an Iranian attack on a Jordanian airbase on Friday, with a third missing in action. Since the war began, 17 US service members have been killed.




What is the US mission against Iran?
 The war was started in February when the former Iranian supreme leader was killed in joint US-Israeli strikes. Trump has indicated several motives for the war, including preventing Tehran from gaining nuclear weapons and trying to force regime change. On Sunday, the US energy secretary, Chris Wright, 
claimed the mission had shifted toward ensuring oil shipments
 could move through Hormuz, after the US-Iran ceasefire faltered.


Mamdani exploring whether he can arrest Netanyahu if he visits New York
New York City mayor, Zohran Mamdani, speaks with prisoners on Rikers Island.
 Photograph: Seth Wenig/AP
New York City’s mayor, Zohran Mamdani, 
has said he is reviewing
 whether his administration could arrest Benjamin Netanyahu if, as expected, he visits the city for the UN general assembly in September. The mayor said he believed Israel’s prime minister “belongs in The Hague”, referring to the Dutch city home of the international criminal court (ICC), which issued an arrest warrant for Netanyahu in November 2024.
Marco Rubio has announced a US policy of trying to “dismantle” the court. Early in his presidency, Trump ordered economic sanctions against the ICC, maintaining it lacked jurisdiction over the US or Israel. Netanyahu brushed off Mamdani’s arrest threats in a radio appearance, saying he was not concerned, and that New York’s mayor was “with the terror actors”.




What did Mamdani say?
 “I believe that Netanyahu belongs in The Hague. He’s a war criminal who has been charged by the ICC, and what you will find is that is an opinion that is held by many, purely because of what his actions have wrought over these past many years. Whatever the law allows me to do in New York City, that’s what we will do.”




What is Netanyahu accused of by the ICC?
 The warrant which the ICC issued for the arrest of Netanyahu and other Israeli leaders accused them of war crimes and crimes against humanity in Gaza, including “starvation as a method of warfare, and … murder, persecution and other inhumane acts”.


Spain win World Cup after Ferran Torres breaks 10-man Argentina’s resistance
Spain celebrate as captain Rodri lifts the World Cup
 Photograph: Hannah McKay/Reuters
Spain have won their second Fifa men’s World Cup
. The reigning European champions enjoyed a 1-0 victory over Lionel Messi’s Argentina in extra-time at New York’s New Jersey Stadium on Sunday. Spain previously won the men’s World Cup in 2010. Spain’s women’s team are also the current world champions.




How did Argentina react to their defeat?
 
In his match report
, David Hytner described their response as “shameful”. Argentina instigated a brawl at the full-time whistle. Enzo Fernández was sent off during the game, while Leandro Paredes received a red card after the match for his part in the fighting. The team then turned their backs on the Spain players as the trophy was presented.




What happened to Donald Trump at the final?
 The US president, accompanied by Fifa president Gianni Infantino, 
was booed
 as they both took to the field for the presentation ceremony before Trump attempted to gatecrash Spain’s victory party picture. Trump’s appearance was the first time he has attended a match at this summer’s World Cup, which theUS co-hosted with Canada and Mexico.


In other news …
Hannah Rapp.
 Photograph: Harry Aaron/Most Valuable Promotions




US boxer 
Hannah Rapp
 was 
struck and killed
 by a driver while cycling
, police have said. Investigators have arrested a 31-year-old man.




JD and 
Usha Vance
 have 
welcomed a baby boy
, their fourth child and the first child born to a sitting VP in 156 years.




A 
second person has died
 in New York City’s legionnaires’ disease outbreak
. Officials say they believe the source of the outbreak “has likely been eliminated”.




Andy Burnham will become
 the UK’s sixth prime minister in a decade
 after meeting King Charles III on Monday, replacing outgoing Keir Starmer.




Ryan Fox was 
crowned golf’s Open champion
 at Royal Birkdale in England, as the favorites wilted under pressure.


Stat of the day: The Odyssey rakes in $264m on opening weekend
Matt Damon in The Odyssey.
 Photograph: Melinda Sue Gordon/Universal Pictures
Christopher Nolan’s The Odyssey has 
stormed the global box office
, taking $264m in its opening weekend.
Building 
power: A year into a national guard deployment, DC residents say they live in ‘a city under siege’
Demonstrators march during a protest in Washington last year.
 Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images
Kirstin Garriss reports from Washington
 on the impact of roughly 2,000-2,500 national guard troops who have been patrolling metro stations, parks, city streets, neighborhoods and tourist attractions for months at the behest of Donald Trump and how communities are fighting back.
Don’t miss this: What happened to Nolan Wells? Family seeks answers two weeks after 18-year-old’s death
Wells was found dead after a boat trip to Horn Island, but the reasons for his death are unclear.
 Photograph: Yuki Iwamura/AP
Two weeks after 18-year-old Nolan Wells was found dead following a 4 July boat trip to Horn Island, his family is still searching for answers. What happened on the island remains unclear, and as local officials continue their investigation, social media misinformation is rampant. 
Here is what we know so far
.
… or this: Sphinxes, movie stars and 3m books – inside Los Angeles’s beloved art deco library
A crowded reading room in the Los Angeles Central Library in 1933.
 Photograph: University of Southern California/Corbis/Getty Images
The architectural gem has been the backdrop to crucial movie moments, and touched by the darker side of LA life – serial killer Richard Ramirez was a visitor and a still-officially unsolved 1986 arson destroyed 400,000 volumes and shut it for seven years. James Bartlett was there as the landmark 
celebrated its centenary
.
Climate check: 
Most US voters link extreme weather to climate crisis, study finds
The Aspen Acres fire engulfs a hillside near Beulah, Colorado.
 Photograph: Jerilee Bennett/The Gazette/AP
Amid a summer of dangerous heat, drought and floods, a majority of Americans are connecting increasingly severe weather to the climate crisis, 
new polling shows
, despite efforts by Trump to dismiss global heating as a “con job” and a “hoax”.
Last Thing: Could AI be conscious?
AI illustration by Elia Barbieri
 Illustration: Elia Barbieri
In building ever more advanced AI, we may be creating a new type of being – and this could be the most consequential thing our species has ever done. Yet we have essentially no plan for how to navigate this process ethically. William MacAskill and Lucius Caviola take us through this big idea: 
Could AI be conscious?
Sign up
Sign up for the US morning briefing
First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, 
subscribe now
.
Get in touch
If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email 
newsletters@theguardian.com