The US launched strikes on 
Iran
 for a third day and Iran retaliated with strikes on US allies and tankers, hours after Donald Trump said the US would take control of the strait of Hormuz and charge a toll to ships for safe passage.
The US military said its five-hour operation early on Tuesday hit targets across Iran, including the port cities of Bushehr and Bandar Abbas. It shared videos of strikes that it said were meant to “degrade Iran’s ability to attack commercial shipping”.
More explosions were heard around noon on Tuesday west of Bandar Abbas, as well as in Bushehr and Choghadak, according to Iranian state TV, though no party had yet claimed responsibility.
Iran targeted Bahrain, which houses the US Navy’s fifth fleet; Jordan, which hosts US air force assets; and two tankers associated with the 
United Arab Emirates
 in the strait of Hormuz.
Bahrain said it had intercepted several of the attacks and accused Iran of targeting civilians, after explosions were heard in its capital, Manama. Jordan said it intercepted four missiles from Iran.
The attacks threaten a return to all-out war and are a significant block to efforts to reopen the strait of Hormuz. Iran in effect closed the strait during the four-month war with the US, and the US imposed a naval blockade of Iranian ships in response. A memorandum of understanding (MoU) between the two countries was supposed to reopen the strait but flares in violence and breakdowns in negotiations have hindered free navigation in the waterway.
On Monday, Trump 
said the US would control the strait and would charge ships up to a 20% toll for safe passage
, a reversal of the previous US position that no country was allowed to charge tolls through the international waterway under the rules of freedom of navigation. The US secretary of state, Marco Rubio, had strongly objected to Iran’s plan to impose fees.
The two countries are now almost halfway through the 60-day period set out by the MoU that was supposed to give room for negotiations to reach a final truce. The two sides have made little progress on key matters such as the strait, Iran’s disputed nuclear programme and regional issues.
US attacks on Iran have killed at least 28 people since last week, according to a tally by Agence France-Presse.
A fire burns at the port of Kish Island in Iran, in an image taken from a social media video released on Tuesday.
 Photograph: Reuters
The Indian foreign ministry said it was lodging a strong protest with Iran and summoned its deputy ambassador after one Indian seafarer was killed and 10 other Indians were seriously wounded by Iranian attacks on two tankers.
The UAE threatened to retaliate against Iran for the attacks. Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) claimed the attack, saying the vessels “ignored repeated warnings”.
Iran called on 
Jordan
 to disband US bases in the kingdom. Addressing Jordan, the IRGC said in a statement: “Not only do we not have any enmity with your country, but we also love you.”
The US threat to impose tolls on ships transiting the strait, which Trump described as a protection fee, risks upsetting global norms on shipping and hundreds of years of US support for freedom of navigation.
Trump suggested the US would charge ships 20% of the value of their cargo to help cover “any and all costs necessary to do to the job of providing safety and security”.
Iran has insisted the US will have no role in the strait. Its foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, said Tehran would be the guardian of the strait “for ever”. On Trump’s threat, Araghchi said on X: “20% is of course too much. We will be fair.”
The price of crude oil rose to a four-week high of more than $86 a barrel on Tuesday but prices are still below their peak during the war, when they hit nearly $120 a barrel.
A motorcade arrives at the US embassy in Rome where talks between Israel and Lebanon were due to take place.
 Photograph: Alessandra Tarantino/AP
Lebanese and Israeli delegations were due to meet in Rome on Tuesday to continue US-mediated negotiations. Lebanon is seeking an Israeli withdrawal from the more than 600 sq km of the country that it occupies, though hopes for a swift withdrawal were low.
Last month Lebanon and Israel announced they had reached a “framework agreement” under which Israeli troops would withdraw from “pilot areas” in south Lebanon. The Lebanese army would then enter those areas, with the promise that they would prevent Hezbollah from returning and continue to dismantle the armed group’s infrastructure there.
The negotiations are between the Lebanese government and Israel. Hezbollah is not a party to the talks. Hezbollah has repeatedly called on the government to stop the talks, framing the direct negotiations as a surrender. It is unclear how agreements from the talks would be implemented on the ground without Hezbollah’s cooperation.