'Most serious security incident' in Romania since start of Ukraine war, president Dan says
Romania’s Dan also offered his readout from the call with Nato’s Rutte.
He 
said
 it was “
the most serious security incident
 to occur on Romanian territory since the start of Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine.”


“
Full responsibility lies with the Russian Federation,
 whose behavior demonstrates total disregard for international law and for the safety of the citizens of a Nato member state.”


Dan stressed the need to work with Nato on strengthening the defence of the alliance’s eastern flank.


“Romania is a strong ally and will not accept Russia’s aggression against Ukraine threatening the security of Romanian citizens.”


Key events
Show key events only
Please turn on JavaScript to use this feature
Slovakia's Fico calls for direct EU-Russia talks, warns against escalation after Romania drone incident
Meanwhile, 
back to the overnight drone strike in 
Romania
, more and more leaders are now joining in their condemnation of what happened.
Slovakia’s prime minister 
Robert Fico
 has warned against any escalation “that we may not be able to manage.”
He expressed “full solidarity” with Romania, but called for “restraint in making inflammatory statements,” while calling for an immediate start of “dialogue” between the EU and 
Russia
.
Hungary expects to sign political deal on reforms, frozen EU funds today, Magyar says
Oh, and just like that, 
Hungary’s Péter Magyar has 
just confirmed plans
 to conclude a political agreement on the release of frozen EU funds this afternoon.
He is due to meet the commission president, 
Ursula von der Leyen
, at 1pm Brussels time.
EU to discuss potential restrictions on Chinese imports amid fears of overreliance
EU commissioners will meet on Friday for crunch talks aimed at imposing new restrictions on imports from China
 amid 
growing concern
 that Beijing is fuelling conditions for US-style rust belt towns in Europe.
Chinese-made BYD electric cars being prepared for export at a port in China. A rise in imports of goods from China, including electric vehicles has prompted concern across the EU.
 Photograph: AFP/Getty Images
The surge in imports of everything from electric cars to key components in machines, medical devices and foodstuffs has been dubbed 
China
 Shock 2.0, potentially mirroring the experience in the US 25 years ago when Beijing joined the World Trade Organization.
Commissioners representing each member state have been asked to 
bring examples of Chinese activities in all 27 portfolios,
 spanning trade to agriculture, defence, health and digital initiatives to the talks.
Sources said 
no decisions would be taken on Friday but the talks would help “align” the commission’s thinking and address overproduction in China,
 which is leading imports into the EU to be sometimes up to 40% cheaper than local products.
It will also 
feed into the next leaders’ summit on 18 June
 when China will be one of the handful of items on the agenda.
Hungarian police see 'no grounds' to ban Budapest Pride after government change
In other news, 
Hungarian police have said they will not ban next month’s Budapest Pride parade, signalling a shift in policy under the new prime minister, Péter Magyar.
The move stands in stark contrast to last year’s attempt to block the event under the nationalist government of 
Viktor Orbán.
“
During the notification process for the 2026 Pride parade
 and the subsequent in-person consultation with the organisers, 
no grounds for prohibiting the assembly arose
,” police told AFP in a statement.
Tens of thousands march against Hungary’s government for LGBT rights – video
The decision 
marks a major shift from years of crackdown on LGBTQ rights,
 which Orbán argued was necessary to “protect children”. The key law, passed in 2021, was last month 
found by the EU’s top court
 to be discriminatory and “contrary to the identity of the union.”
In January, prosecutors in Hungary 
filed charges
 against the progressive mayor of Budapest, Gergely Karácsony, seeking to fine him for last year’s event, 
attended by up to 200,000 people, 
which went ahead despite a government ban.
While 
Magyar remained vague on the issue before last month’s election
 and is yet to reverse the Orbán-era laws, he has 
hinted at a more liberal approach.
After winning the parliamentary election last month, 
Magyar pointedly said he was committed to freedom of assembly.
 “Everyone can live with whoever they love as long as they do not violate laws and they are not harmful to others,” 
he said.
Last month’s 
poll by the European Council of Foreign Relations found
 that 71% of Tisza voters supported, or somewhat supported, the new government protecting the rights of LGBTQ+ people.
Restoring civil rights is also seen as part of a broader rule-of-law reset with the European Union,
 following years of bitter clashes with Orbán, as Magyar seeks to unfreeze billions in EU funds earmarked for Hungary’s struggling economy.
He is expected to hold further talks with the European Commission president, 
Ursula von der Leyen,
 later on Friday, and the two could strike a political deal on key reforms, needed to pave the way to restore EU funds to Hungary.
This year’s Budapest Pride parade is scheduled for 27 June.
Share
Updated at 
05.25 EDT
Let’s 
quickly take a look at other news from around Europe
 before we get back to 
Romania
 for the latest.
Romania’s foreign minister Oana-Silvia Țoiu spoke with the EU’s chief diplomat Kaja Kallas this morning,
 discussing the overnight incident and “its implications for the safety of citizens.”
“I received assurances of strong European solidarity in response to this irresponsible escalation by the Russian Federation. We will accelerate the adoption of the new package of sanctions against Russia,” she 
said
.
Czechia's president Pavel calls for 'strong' response so Russia 'clearly understand' Nato 'will not tolerate such attacks'
Oh, and 
Czechia’s president Pavel has just made it clear that his views, as expressed in our interview last week, still stand as he called for “a strong international response” to the drone incident.
In 
a post on X
, he said:


“The unprecedented night-time strike by a Russian drone on a residential building in Galați, Romania, which left two people injured, is completely unacceptable. 
However, we should not stop at simply condemning it together.
 


I therefore 
unequivocally support Romanian President Dan’s call for a strong international response.
 


Russia must clearly understand that we will not tolerate such attacks.
”


Hungary's Magyar condemns drone incident as former PM Orbán says it reinforces need for Hungary's 'neutrality'
Meanwhile, 
Hungary’s new prime minister Péter Magyar “condemned in the strongest terms” the last night’s incident in Romania, expressing his country’s solidarity with the Romanian people.
“Yesterday’s Russian drone attack once again highlights that the unity of Europe and Nato is more important today than ever before,” he said.
But curiously, 
his predecessor, Viktor Orbán, also chose to speak publicly by putting more pressure on Hungary to “maintain the policy of neutrality”
 in response to the Russian aggression on 
Ukraine
.
“This incident reinforces the fact that 
the war poses a direct threat to neighbouring countries
,” he argued, urging the new administration in Budapest “to refrain from taking any steps towards the pro-war policy advocated by parts of 
Europe
.”
Not a word of condemnation or criticism towards Russia from Orbán though.
The incident comes just days after 
the Czech president, Petr Pavel, has urged Nato to “show its teeth” in response to Russia’s repeated testing of the alliance’s resolve on its eastern flank,
 suggesting a range of options including switching off its internet, cutting off its banks from global financial systems and shooting down jets that violate allied airspace.
Czech Republic president Petr Pavel ahead of the summit of Bucharest Nine (B9) and Nordic Countries Summit in Bucharest, Romania.
 Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images
Speaking to the Guardian in Prague last week, 
Pavel called for “decisive enough, potentially even asymmetric” responses 
to counter Moscow’s provocative behaviour against the alliance or risk the Kremlin intensifying its actions.
A retired general and former chair of the Nato military committee, 
the 64-year-old’s defence background is rare among European leaders.
 His years of experience talking to Moscow on the suspended Nato-Russia council have made him an influential voice on the future of the alliance and the threats it faces.
Pavel said 
Russian military leaders laughed at times at the alliance’s decision-making paralysis.
“When I asked them why do they do these provocative actions in the air, close encounters or overflights over battleships in the Black Sea or the Baltic Sea, their answer was ‘because we can’. That’s exactly the kind of behaviour we allowed,” he said.
'Most serious security incident' in Romania since start of Ukraine war, president Dan says
Romania’s Dan also offered his readout from the call with Nato’s Rutte.
He 
said
 it was “
the most serious security incident
 to occur on Romanian territory since the start of Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine.”


“
Full responsibility lies with the Russian Federation,
 whose behavior demonstrates total disregard for international law and for the safety of the citizens of a Nato member state.”


Dan stressed the need to work with Nato on strengthening the defence of the alliance’s eastern flank.


“Romania is a strong ally and will not accept Russia’s aggression against Ukraine threatening the security of Romanian citizens.”


US ambassador to Nato condemns drone incident in Romania
US ambassador to Nato, Matthew Whitaker, responded to the incident on X
, saying:


“
We stand with our Nato Ally Romania and condemn this reckless incursion on its territory.
 Our thoughts are with the injured in Galati. We will defend every inch of Nato territory.”


Speaking to the Romanian news portal 
Adevarul
, 
retired general Dan Grecu suggested that the drone may have been electronically jammed during a Russian attack on Ukraine.
He 
argued
 that 
the drone may have been disrupted by Ukraine as a defensive measure, with no intention to send it towards Romania either,
 but just to disorientate the machine’s location systems – making its incursion into Romania accidental.
Grecu added that 
it was fortunate the drone did not strike the lower floors of the apartment block,
 noting that such a collision could have had far more serious consequences.
First daylight pictures from the scene
We are now 
getting more pictures showing the extent of damage caused by the drone.
A view shows damages caused by a Russian drone hitting an apartment building in the eastern city of Galați, Romania.
 Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images
Municipal workers clear debris from the street after a Russian drone struck an apartment building in Galați, eastern Romania. 
 Photograph: Daniel Mihăilescu/AFP/Getty Images
Russian drone spent four minutes in Romanian airspace, shooting it down was deemed to risky, minister says
Meanwhile, 
Romania’s defence minister Radu Miruță offered a bit more detail on the incident.
In 
a post on Facebook
, he said 
the Russian drone – confirmed as of Geran 2 type – was in Romanian airspace for four minutes,
 and was immediately spotted on a newly installed air defence radar in the area.
However, 
despite the military’s readiness to shoot it down, the move was deemed too risky
, 
he said
.
“We are in constant contact and are already working on additional measures to strengthen security on the eastern flank. Some of these measures will be announced in the coming hours,” he said.
Romania’s chief of defence staff, Gen Gheorghiță Vlad, spoke with Nato commanders this morning, discussing the last night’s drone incident in Galați.
In comments 
reported by Antena3
, he said it further 
underlined the need to ramp up the surveillance and the reaction forces on the eastern flank of Nato.
But he stressed that 
Romania was not the intended target of the attack,
 but it showed the risks posed by the continuing Russian aggression on 
Ukraine
, Antena3 reported.
'Russia’s reckless behaviour is a danger to us all,' Nato's Rutte says after call with Romanian president
Nato’s Mark Rutte said he just spoke with Romania’s president Dan about the overnight incident, assuring him of Nato’s “absolute solidarity.”
“I affirmed that 
Nato stands ready to defend every inch of Allied territory.
 We will continue to enhance our readiness to deter and defend against any threat, including from drones,” he said.
He added:


“
Russia’s reckless behaviour is a danger to us all.
 They continue to target civilians and civilian infrastructure across Ukraine. And last night showed yet again that the implications of their illegal war of aggression don’t stop at the border.”


He continued:


“Russia’s war needs to end, as does Russia’s disregard for civilian safety.
 For our part, we will continue to strengthen our deterrence and defence at home and continue our support for Ukraine as they defend against Russia’s aggression.”


We are 
getting more reactions to the incident in 
Romania
 from around Europe.
EU foreign policy chief, 
Kaja Kallas,
 said:


“The Russian drone crash into apartments in Galați was a blatant and serious violation of Romania’s sovereignty and European airspace. I spoke with Foreign Minister @oana_toiu this morning to convey the EU’s full solidarity with Romania.


Russia has long ago stopped respecting borders. 
Moscow cannot be allowed to breach European airspace with impunity.


EU Foreign Ministers yesterday vowed to ramp up pressure on Russia, increase support for Ukraine, and invest in Europe’s own defence readiness.”


Lithuania’s president 
Gitanas Nausėda 
strongly condemned “the heinous Russian drone attack,” calling it “a blatant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Romania.”
Latvia’s president 
Edgars Rinkēvičs
 also expressed “full solidarity” with Romania.”
Austrian chancellor 
Christian Stocker
 said it was “utterly reprehensible” and “another dangerous escalation” from Russia.
Morning opening: Russian drone hits apartment block, injures two in Nato member Romania
A Russian drone launched against 
Ukraine
 crashed into an apartment building in Galati in eastern Romania, a Nato country, leaving two people injured.
A fire burns on the roof of a 10-story block of flats after a drone crashed into the building in Galați, Romania.
 Photograph: Romanian Department for Emergency Situations (DSU)/Reuters
Romania’s president 
Nicușor Dan 
has called a meeting of the national security council for this morning to discuss the response, saying he will “order proportionate measures.” Separately, 
Romania
 summoned the Russian ambassador.
Furious Dan said on social media:


“What happened today in Galați is 
the direct consequence of Russia’s war of aggression unleashed against Ukraine,
 the irresponsible and indiscriminate manner in which Moscow operates these weapon systems in the immediate vicinity of Nato borders, as well as the systematic disregard for international law. 
There is no ambiguity regarding the perpetrator or the cause of this aggression.
”


He added:


“Romania is a Nato member state and will not accept, in any way, the war of aggression waged by Russia against Ukraine to be transferred on to its citizens.”


The incident also drew immediate and widespread condemnation from top EU leaders,
 including the European Commission president, 
Ursula von der Leyen.


“Russia’s war of aggression has crossed yet another line. A Russian drone incursion struck a densely populated area in Romania, injuring civilians. On EU territory.”


She added that the EU “will keep increasing the pressure on 
Russia
,” and is “preparing a 21st package of sanctions.”
The overnight attack will no doubt dominate the headlines today.
But in other news, 
we will also follow the new Hungarian prime minister Péter Magyar’s visit to Brussels 
for crunch talks with the European Commission, and 
the latest on the May heatwave affecting large parts of Europe.
It’s 
Friday, 29 May 2026
, it’s 
Jakub Krupa
 here, and this is 
Europe Live
.
Good morning.