2008
Over the past six decades, United Nations peacekeeping 
has evolved into a complex, global undertaking. During 
this time, the conduct of United Nations peacekeeping 
operations has been guided by a largely unwritten body 
of principles and informed by the experiences of the 
many thousands of men and women who have served in 
the more than 60 operations launched since 1948. This 
document captures these experiences for the benefit and 
guidance of planners and practitioners of United Nations 
peacekeeping operations.
United Nations 
Peacekeeping Operations
Principles and Guidelines
2008
Over the past six decades, United Nations peacekeeping 
has evolved into a complex, global undertaking. During 
this time, conduct of United Nations peacekeeping 
operations has been guided by a largely unwritten body 
of principles and informed by the experiences of the 
many thousands of men and women who have served in 
the more than 60 operations launched since 1948. This 
document captures these experiences for the benefit and 
guidance of planners and practitioners of United Nations 
peacekeeping operations.
United Nations 
Peacekeeping Operations
Principles and Guidelines
United Nations 
Peacekeeping Operations
Principles and Guidelines
United Nations 
Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Department of Field Support
2 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS CONTENTS | 3
ContentsCredits
Peacekeeping Best Practices Section
Division of Policy, Evaluation and Training
Department of Peacekeeping Operations
United Nations Secretariat
One UN Plaza, New York, NY 10017
Tel. 212 963 1234
Approved by J.-M. Guéhenno, USG/DPKO
Approved on 18 January 2008
Contact: PBPS/D-PET
Review date: January 2010
© United Nations 2008. This publication enjoys copyright under Protocol 2 
of the Universal Copyright Convention. Nevertheless, governmental authori-
ties or Member States may freely photocopy any part of this publication 
for exclusive use within their training institutes. However, no portion of 
this publication may be reproduced for sale or mass publication without 
the express consent, in writing, of the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section, 
United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Design and layout: Rick Jones (rick @studioexile.com)
Foreword Jean-Marie Guéhenno ........................................................................................................................... 6
Introduction Scope and Purpose of the Document .................................................................. 8
PART I: THE EVOLUTION OF UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING
Chapter 1 The Normative Framework for 
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations ............................................................................................. 13
1.1 The Charter of the United Nations .............................................................................................. 13
1.2 Human Rights ........................................................................................................................................................... 14
1.3 International Humanitarian Law ................................................................................................... 15
1.4 Security Council Mandates .................................................................................................................... 16
Chapter 2 The Evolving Role of United Nations 
Peacekeeping Operations ............................................................................................................................................. 17
2.1 The Spectrum of Peace and Security Activities ........................................................ 17
2.2 Linkages and Grey Areas ......................................................................................................................... 18
2.3 The Core Business of United Nations 
Peacekeeping Operations .................................................................................................................................... 20
2.4 Peacebuilding Activities ............................................................................................................................. 25
2.5 Supporting Other Actors ........................................................................................................................... 29
4 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS CONTENTS | 5
Chapter 3 The Basic Principles of United Nations Peacekeeping ...................... 31
3.1 Applying the Basic Principles of 
United Nations Peacekeeping ....................................................................................................................... 31
3.2 Other Success Factors ..................................................................................................................................... 36
Endnotes ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 41
PART II: PLANNING UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS
Chapter 4 Deciding to Deploy a United Nations 
Peacekeeping Operation ................................................................................................................................................ 47
4.1 Assessing the Options for United Nations Engagement ............................. 47
4.2 Key Lessons for Planners and Decision Makers ..................................................... 49
4.3 The Importance of Consultations with 
Contributing Countries .......................................................................................................................................... 52
Chapter 5 Planning a United Nations Peacekeeping Operation ......................... 53
5.1 The Integrated Approach ........................................................................................................................... 53
5.2 The Integrated Mission Planning Process (IMPP) ............................................... 54
Endnotes ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 57
PART III: THE ART OF SUCCESSFUL MANDATE IMPLEMENTATION
Chapter 6 Deployment and Start-Up of 
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations ............................................................................................ 61
6.1 Typical Phases of Deployment ........................................................................................................... 61
6.2 The Mission Start-Up Process ............................................................................................................. 62
6.3 Managing the Mission Start-Up Process ............................................................................. 64
Chapter 7 Managing United Nations Peacekeeping Operations ....................... 66
7.1 The Relationship between Headquarters and the Field ............................... 66
7.2 The Challenge of Mission Integration and Coordination .......................... 69
Chapter 8 Supporting and Sustaining 
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations 
............................................................................................ 75
8.1 United Nations Logistics and Administration .......................................................... 75
8.2 Human Resource Management ....................................................................................................... 77
8.3 Security of Personnel ....................................................................................................................................... 79
Chapter 9 Maintaining Support for the Mission ........................................................................ 81
9.1 Managing Mission Impact ....................................................................................................................... 81
9.2 Communications and Outreach ...................................................................................................... 92
Chapter 10 Transition and Exit ............................................................................................................................. 85
10.1 Partnerships and Transition Planning ................................................................................ 85
10.2 Hand-Over and Withdrawal ............................................................................................................. 86
Endnotes ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 91
Annex 1 United Nations Peacekeeping Doctrine Framework ................................ 92
Annex 2 Selected Glossary of Acronyms and Terms ........................................................... 94
6 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS FOREWORD | 7
Jean-Marie Guéhenno
Foreword
Over the past sixty years, United Nations peacekeeping has evolved into 
one of the main tools used by the international community to manage com-
plex crises that pose a threat to international peace and security. Since the 
beginning of the new millennium, the number of military, police and civil-
ian personnel deployed in United Nations peacekeeping operations around 
the world has reached unprecedented levels. Not only has United Nations 
peacekeeping grown in size but it has become increasingly complex. Beyond 
simply monitoring cease-fires, today’s multi-dimensional peacekeeping oper-
ations are called upon to facilitate the political process through the promo-
tion of national dialogue and reconciliation, protect civilians, assist in the 
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of combatants, support the 
organization of elections, protect and promote human rights, and assist in 
restoring the rule of law.
In order to meet the challenges posed by the unprecedented scale and scope 
of today’s missions, the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Opera-
tions (DPKO) and the Department of Field Support (DFS) have embarked 
on a major reform effort, Peace Operations 2010, aimed at strengthening and 
professionalizing the planning, management and conduct of United Nations 
peacekeeping operations. A key objective of this ongoing reform process is 
to ensure that the growing numbers of United Nations peacekeeping per -
sonnel deployed in the field, as well as those serving at Headquarters, have 
access to clear, authoritative guidance on the multitude of tasks they are 
required to perform.
The present publication, which has been developed in close consultation with 
field missions, Member States, United Nations system partners and other 
key stakeholders, represents the first attempt in over a decade to codify the 
major lessons learned from the past six decades of United Nations peace -
keeping experience. It is intended to help practitioners better understand the 
basic principles and concepts underpinning the conduct of contemporary 
United Nations peacekeeping operations as well as their inherent strengths 
and limitations.
I would like to express my gratitude to all those who have contributed to 
the development of this key guidance document, which will continue to be 
reviewed and updated in the coming years as United Nations peacekeeping 
evolves and new lessons are learnt. 
  
Jean-Marie Guéhenno
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations 
March 2008
8 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS INTRODUCTION | 9
sustainable peace in countries emerging from conflict. It identifies the com-
parative advantages and limitations of United Nations peacekeeping opera-
tions as a conflict management tool, and explains the basic principles that 
should guide their planning and conduct. In doing so, it reflects the primary 
lessons learned during the past sixty years of United Nations peacekeep -
ing. It draws on landmark reports of the Secretary-General and legislative 
responses to these reports, as well as relevant resolutions and statements of 
the principal organs of the United Nations. 
The present document is an internal DPKO/DFS publication. It sits at the 
highest-level of the current doctrine framework for United Nations peace-
keeping. Any subordinate directives, guidelines, standard operating proce-
dures, manuals and training materials issued by DPKO/DFS should conform 
to the principles and concepts referred to in this guidance document. 
The document is intended to serve as a guide for all United Nations per -
sonnel serving in the field and at United Nations Headquarters, as well as an 
introduction to those who are new to United Nations peacekeeping. Although 
it is intended to help guide the planning and conduct of United Nations 
peacekeeping operations, its specific application will require judgement and 
will vary according to the situation on the ground. Peacekeeping practi -
tioners in the field are often faced with a confusing and contradictory set 
of imperatives and pressures. This document is unable to resolve many of 
these issues; indeed, some have no clear, prescribed answers. Instead, it pro-
vides a handrail to assist planners and practitioners manoeuvre through 
the complexities of contemporary United Nations peacekeeping operations.
This document reflects the multi-dimensional nature of contemporary United 
Nations peacekeeping operations, which are normally led in the field by a 
senior United Nations political figure. It does not seek to override the na -
tional military doctrines of individual Member States participating in these 
operations and it does not address any military tactics, techniques and 
procedures (TTPs), which remain the prerogative of individual Member 
States. It is, nonetheless, intended to support civilian, police and military  
Over the past six decades, United Nations peacekeeping has evolved into a 
complex, global undertaking. During this time, the conduct of United Nations 
peacekeeping operations has been guided by a largely unwritten body of 
principles and informed by the experiences of the many thousands of men 
and women who have served in the more than 60 operations launched since 
1948. This document captures these experiences for the benefit and guidance 
of planners and practitioners of United Nations peacekeeping operations. 
The spectrum of contemporary peace operations has become increasingly 
broad and includes both United Nations – led peace operations, as well as 
those conducted by other actors, normally with the authorization of the 
Security Council. This guidance document focuses on only one element of 
that spectrum: United Nations-led peacekeeping operations, authorized 
by the Security Council, conducted under the direction of the United Nations 
Secretary-General, and planned, managed, directed and supported by the 
United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the 
Department of Field Support (DFS). The specific focus of this document rec-
ognizes the need for a clearer articulation of the doctrinal foundations of 
United Nations peacekeeping operations, in light of the new challenges posed 
by the shifting nature of conflict, from inter-state to intra-state conflicts. 
The present document aims to define the nature, scope and core business 
of contemporary United Nations peacekeeping operations, which are usu-
ally deployed as one part of a much broader international effort to build a 
Scope and Purpose of the Document
Introduction
10 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS INTRODUCTION | 11
PART I
The Evolution of United Nations  
Peacekeeping Operations
The Charter of the United Nations was signed, in San 
Francisco, on 26 June 1945 and is the foundation docu -
ment for all the United Nations work. The United Nations 
was established to “save succeeding generations from 
the scourge of war” and one of its main purposes is to 
maintain international peace and security. Peacekeeping, 
although not explicitly provided for in the Charter, has 
evolved into one of the main tools used by the United 
Nations to achieve this purpose.
 
personnel who are training and preparing to serve in United Nations peace-
keeping operations. Troop Contributing Countries and Police Contributing 
Countries (TCCs/PCCs) to United Nations peacekeeping operations may 
wish to draw on this document in developing their respective doctrines, 
training and pre-deployment programmes. 
For partners, this guidance document is intended to foster a clearer under-
standing of the major principles guiding the conduct of United Nations 
peacekeeping operations. Key partners include TCCs/PCCs, regional and 
other inter-governmental organizations, the range of humanitarian and 
development actors involved in international crisis management, as well as 
national and local actors in the countries where United Nations peacekeep-
ing operations are deployed. In this regard, the document supports a vision 
of a system of inter-locking capabilities in which the roles and responsibili-
ties and comparative advantages of the various partners are clearly defined. 
This document draws on analysis contained in the landmark 2000 Report 
of the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations (The Brahimi Report) and other 
existing sources to help guide United Nations peacekeepers in the coming 
years. It is a living document that will be reviewed and updated regularly 
to reflect major evolutions in United Nations peacekeeping practices. The 
current version will be due for review in January 2010 and may be updated 
earlier, if required. As with the current version, Member States, TCCs/
PCCs, field missions, United Nations system partners, regional organiza -
tions and other key stakeholders will be consulted to ensure that the docu-
ment continues to reflect the concerns, views, insights, and expertise of major 
partners both within and outside the United Nations system.
12 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 1 | 13
1.1 The Charter of the United Nations
The Charter of the United Nations was signed, in San Francisco, on 26 June 
1945 and is the foundation document for all the United Nations work. The 
United Nations was established to “save succeeding generations from the 
scourge of war” and one of its main purposes is to maintain international 
peace and security. Peacekeeping, although not explicitly provided for in the 
Charter, has evolved into one of the main tools used by the United Nations 
to achieve this purpose. 
The Charter gives the United Nations Security Council primary responsi -
bility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
1 In fulfilling 
this responsibility, the Security Council may adopt a range of measures, 
including the establishment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation. 
The legal basis for such action is found in Chapters VI, VII and VIII of the 
Charter. While Chapter VI deals with the “Pacific Settlement of Disputes” , 
Chapter VII contains provisions related to “ Action with Respect to the Peace, 
Breaches of the Peace and Acts of Aggression” . Chapter VIII of the Charter 
also provides for the involvement of regional arrangements and agencies 
in the maintenance of international peace and security, provided such activi-
ties are consistent with the purposes and principles outlined in Chapter I 
of the Charter.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have traditionally been associated 
with Chapter VI of the Charter. However, the Security Council need not 
Chapter 1 
The Normative Framework for  
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations
Chapter 2 
The Evolving Role of United Nations  
Peacekeeping Operations
Chapter 3 
The Basic Principles of  
United Nations Peacekeeping
The Normative Framework for  
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations
Chapter 1
14 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 1 | 15
refer to a specific Chapter of the Charter when passing a resolution author-
izing the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation and has 
never invoked Chapter VI. In recent years, the Security Council has adopted 
the practice of invoking Chapter VII of the Charter when authorizing the 
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping operations into volatile post-
conflict settings where the State is unable to maintain security and public 
order. The Security Council’s invocation of Chapter VII in these situations, 
in addition to denoting the legal basis for its action, can also be seen as a 
statement of firm political resolve and a means of reminding the parties to 
a conflict and the wider United Nations membership of their obligation to 
give effect to Security Council decisions.
Linking United Nations peacekeeping with a particular Chapter of the Char-
ter can be misleading for the purposes of operational planning, training and 
mandate implementation. In assessing the nature of each peacekeeping oper-
ation and the capabilities needed to support it, TCCs and PCCs should be 
guided by the tasks assigned by the Security Council mandate, the concept 
of operations and accompanying mission Rules of Engagement (ROE) for 
the military component, and the Directives on the Use of Force (DUF) for 
the police component. 
1.2 Human Rights 
International human rights law is an integral part of the normative frame-
work for United Nations peacekeeping operations. The Universal Declara-
tion of Human Rights, which sets the cornerstone of international human 
rights standards, emphasizes that human rights and fundamental freedoms 
are universal and guaranteed to everybody. United Nations peacekeeping 
operations should be conducted in full respect of human rights and should 
seek to advance human rights through the implementation of their mandates 
(See Chapter 2). 
United Nations peacekeeping personnel – whether military , police or civilian 
– should act in accordance with international human rights law and under-
stand how the implementation of their tasks intersects with human rights. 
Peacekeeping personnel should strive to ensure that they do not become 
perpetrators of human rights abuses. They must be able to recognize human 
rights violations or abuse, and be prepared to respond appropriately within 
the limits of their mandate and their competence. United Nations peacekeep-
ing personnel should respect human rights in their dealings with colleagues 
and with local people, both in their public and in their private lives. Where 
they commit abuses, they should be held accountable. 
1.3 International Humanitarian Law 
International humanitarian law is known also as “the law of war” or “the law 
of armed conflict,” and restricts the means and methods of armed conflict. 
International humanitarian law is contained in the four Geneva Conven -
tions of 1949 and their two Additional Protocols of 1977, as well as in rules 
regulating the means and methods of combat. International humanitarian 
law also includes conventions and treaties on the protection of cultural prop-
erty and the environment during armed conflict, as well as protection of 
victims of conflict. 
International humanitarian law is designed to protect persons who do not 
participate, or are no longer participating, in the hostilities; and it main -
tains the fundamental rights of civilians, victims and non-combatants in 
an armed conflict. It is relevant to United Nations peacekeeping operations 
because these missions are often deployed into post-conflict environments 
where violence may be ongoing or conflict could reignite. Additionally, in 
post-conflict environments there are often large civilian populations that 
have been targeted by the warring parties, prisoners of war and other vul-
nerable groups to whom the Geneva Conventions or other humanitarian law 
would apply in the event of further hostilities. 
United Nations peacekeepers must have a clear understanding of the prin-
ciples and rules of international humanitarian law and observe them in situ-
ations where they apply. The Secretary-General’s Bulletin on the Observance
16 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 2 | 17
by United Nations Forces of International Humanitarian Law of 6 August 
1999 ( ST/SGB/1999/13) sets out the fundamental principles and rules of 
international law that may be applicable to United Nations peacekeepers. 
1.4 Security Council Mandates 
United Nations peacekeeping operations are deployed on the basis of a man-
date from the United Nations Security Council. The tasks that a United Nations 
peacekeeping operation will be required to perform are set out in the Secu-
rity Council mandate. Security Council mandates differ from situation to 
situation, depending on the nature of the conflict and the specific challenges 
it presents. Since United Nations peacekeeping operations are normally de-
ployed to support the implementation of a cease-fire or a more comprehensive 
peace agreement, Security Council mandates are influenced by the nature 
and content of the agreement reached by the parties to the conflict. 
Security Council mandates also reflect the broader normative debates shap-
ing the international environment. In this regard, there are a number of 
cross-cutting, thematic tasks that are regularly assigned to United Nations 
peacekeeping operations on the basis of the following landmark Security 
Council resolutions: 
 Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security;2 
 Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict;3 
 Security Council resolution 1674 (2006) on the protection of civilians in 
armed conflict;4 
The range of tasks assigned to United Nations peacekeeping operations has 
expanded significantly in response to shifting patterns of conflict and to best 
address emerging threats to international peace and security. Although each 
United Nations peacekeeping operation is different, there is a considerable 
degree of consistency in the types of mandated tasks assigned by the Secu-
rity Council. These are described in greater detail in Chapter 2 , below. 
2.1 The Spectrum of Peace and Security Activities
Peacekeeping is one among a range of activities undertaken by the United 
Nations and other international actors to maintain international peace and 
security throughout the world. Although peacekeeping is the focus of this 
document, it is important for practitioners to understand how it relates to 
and differs from conflict prevention, peacemaking, peace enforcement and 
peacebuilding. 
Conflict prevention involves the application of structural or diplomatic meas-
ures to keep intra-state or inter-state tensions and disputes from escalating 
into violent conflict. Ideally, it should build on structured early warning, 
information gathering and a careful analysis of the factors driving the con-
flict. Conflict prevention activities may include the use of the Secretary-
General’s “good offices,” preventive deployment or confidence-building 
measures.
Peacemaking generally includes measures to address conflicts in progress 
and usually involves diplomatic action to bring hostile parties to a negoti-
ated agreement. The United Nations Secretary-General, upon the request of 
the Security Council or the General Assembly or at his her own initiative, 
may exercise his or her “ good offices” to facilitate the resolution of the conflict. 
Peacemakers may also be envoys, governments, groups of states, regional 
organizations or the United Nations. Peacemaking efforts may also be under-
The Evolving Role of United Nations  
Peacekeeping Operations
Chapter 2
18 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 2 | 19
taken by unofficial and non-governmental groups, or by a prominent per-
sonality working independently. 
Peacekeeping is a technique designed to preserve the peace, however frag-
ile, where fighting has been halted, and to assist in implementing agree -
ments achieved by the peacemakers. Over the years, peacekeeping has 
evolved from a primarily military model of observing cease-fires and the 
separation of forces after inter-state wars, to incorporate a complex model 
of many elements – military, police and civilian – working together to help 
lay the foundations for sustainable peace.
Peace enforcement involves the application, with the authorization of the 
Security Council, of a range of coercive measures, including the use of 
military force. Such actions are authorized to restore international peace 
and security in situations where the Security Council has determined the 
existence of a threat to the peace, breach of the peace or act of aggression. 
The Security Council may utilize, where appropriate, regional organiza -
tions and agencies for enforcement action under its authority. 
Peacebuilding involves a range of measures targeted to reduce the risk of 
lapsing or relapsing into conflict by strengthening national capacities at all 
levels for conflict management, and to lay the foundation for sustainable 
peace and development. Peacebuilding is a complex, long-term process of 
creating the necessary conditions for sustainable peace. It works by address-
ing the deep-rooted, structural causes of violent conflict in a comprehensive 
manner. Peacebuilding measures address core issues that effect the func -
tioning of society and the State, and seek to enhance the capacity of the State 
to effectively and legitimately carry out its core functions.
2.2 Linkages and Grey Areas
The boundaries between conflict prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping, 
peacebuilding and peace enforcement have become increasingly blurred, as 
seen in Figure 1. Peace operations are rarely limited to one type of activity, 
whether United Nations-led
 or conducted by non-United Nations actors. 
While United Nations peacekeeping operations are, in principle, deployed 
to support the implementation of a cease-fire or peace agreement, they are 
often required to play an active role in peacemaking efforts and may also 
be involved in early peacebuilding activities. United Nations peacekeeping 
operations may also use force at the tactical level, with the authorization of 
the Security Council, to defend themselves and their mandate, particularly 
in situations where the State is unable to provide security and maintain 
public order. As discussed in Chapter 3 below, although the line between 
“robust” peacekeeping and peace enforcement may appear blurred at times, 
there are important differences between the two. While robust peacekeep-
ing involves the use of force at the tactical level with the consent of the host 
authorities and/or the main parties to the conflict, peace enforcement may 
involve the use of force at the strategic or international level, which is nor-
mally prohibited for Member States under Article 2 (4) of the Charter unless 
authorized by the Security Council.
Figure 1 Linkages and Grey Areas
Conflict
Cease-fire
Political  
Process
CONFLICT PREVENTION
PEACE ENFORCEMENT
PEACEKEEPING
POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING AND 
PREVENTING RELAPSE TO CONFLICT
PEACEMAKING
20 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 2 | 21
Conflict prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace enforcement 
rarely occur in a linear or sequential way. Indeed, experience has shown that 
they should be seen as mutually reinforcing. Used piecemeal or in isolation, 
they fail to provide the comprehensive approach required to address the 
root causes of conflict that, thereby, reduces the risk of conflict recurring. 
However, the international community’s ability to combine these activities 
effectively remains limited and this has, in some cases, resulted in critical 
gaps in the international response to crises that have threatened international 
peace and security. 
The creation of a new United Nations peacebuilding architecture reflects a 
growing recognition within the international community of the linkages 
between the United Nations peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuild-
ing roles. When a country comes before it, the Peacebuilding Commission 
helps marshal the resources at the disposal of the international community 
and advise on and propose integrated strategies for peacebuilding and 
recovery. In doing so, it aims to bring together relevant actors, including 
international financial institutions and other donors, United Nations agen-
cies, civil society organizations, and others in support of these strategies; 
as well as to provide strategic advice to the principal United Nations organs 
and help facilitate political dialogue, enhance coordination, and monitor 
the progress of both national and international actors. 
2.3 The Core Business of United Nations  
Peacekeeping Operations 
Although not provided for in the Charter, the practice of peacekeeping began 
in 1948 when the first United Nations military observers were deployed to 
the Middle East. During the ensuing Cold War years, the goals of United 
Nations peacekeeping were necessarily limited to maintaining cease-fires 
and stabilizing situations on the ground, so that efforts could be made at the 
political level to resolve the conflict by peaceful means. Several of the United 
Nations longstanding peacekeeping operations fit this “traditional” model. 
Traditional United Nations peacekeeping operations are deployed as an in-
terim measure to help manage a conflict and create conditions in which the 
negotiation of a lasting settlement can proceed. The tasks assigned to tradi-
tional United Nations peacekeeping operations by the Security Council are 
essentially military in character and may involve the following:
 Observation, monitoring and reporting – using static posts, patrols, over-
flights or other technical means, with the agreement of the parties;
 Supervision of cease-fire and support to verification mechanisms; 
 Interposition as a buffer and confidence-building measure. 
By monitoring and reporting on the parties’ adherence to commitments 
regarding a cease-fire or demilitarized zone and by investigating complaints 
of violations, traditional peacekeeping operations enable each party to be 
reassured that the other party will not seek to exploit the cease-fire in order 
to gain military advantage. 
Traditional peacekeeping operations do not normally play a direct role in 
political efforts to resolve the conflict. Other actors such as bilateral partners 
to the parties, regional organizations or even special United Nations envoys 
may be working on longer-term political solutions, which will allow the 
peacekeeping operation to withdraw. As a result, some traditional peace -
keeping operations are deployed for decades before a lasting political settle-
ment is reached between the parties. 
With the end of the Cold War, the strategic context for United Nations peace-
keeping changed dramatically and the Security Council began to work more 
actively to promote the containment and peaceful resolution of regional 
conflicts. While the end of the Cold War coincided with a general decline 
in the incidence of conflict around the world, internal armed conflicts con-
stitute the vast majority of today’s wars. Many of these conflicts take place 
in the world’s poorest countries where state capacity may be weak, and 
where belligerents may be motivated by economic gain, as much as ideology
22 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 2 | 23
or past grievances. Moreover, evidence has shown that a large proportion 
of all civil wars are due to a relapse of conflict, the risks of which are par -
ticularly high in the first five to 10 years following a conflict. 
The transformation of the international environment has given rise to a 
new generation of “multi-dimensional” United Nations peacekeeping oper-
ations. These operations are typically deployed in the dangerous aftermath 
of a violent internal conflict and may employ a mix of military, police and 
civilian capabilities to support the implementation of a comprehensive peace 
agreement.
5 
Some multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations have been 
deployed following a request from the national authorities to support the 
transition to legitimate government, in the absence of a formal peace agree-
ment. In exceptional circumstances, the Security Council has also authorized 
multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations to temporarily 
assume the legislative and administrate functions of the State, in order to 
support the transfer of authority from one sovereign entity to another, or 
until sovereignty questions are fully resolved (as in the case of transitional 
administrations), or to help the State to establish administrative structures 
that may not have existed previously. 
Multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations deployed in 
the aftermath of an internal conflict face a particularly challenging environ-
ment. The State’s capacity to provide security to its population and main-
tain public order is often weak, and violence may still be ongoing in various 
parts of the country. Basic infrastructure is likely to have been destroyed 
and large sections of the population may have been displaced. Society may 
be divided along ethnic, religious and regional lines and grave human rights 
abuses may have been committed during the conflict, further complicating 
efforts to achieve national reconciliation. 
Multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations are deployed 
as one part of a much broader international effort to help countries emerging 
from conflict make the transition to a sustainable peace. As shown in Figure 
2 above, this effort consists of several phases and may involve an array of 
actors with separate, albeit overlapping, mandates and areas of expertise. 
Within this broader context, the core functions of a multi-dimensional United 
Nations peacekeeping operation are to: 
a) Create a secure and stable environment while strengthening the State’s 
ability to provide security, with full respect for the rule of law and 
human rights; 
b) Facilitate the political process by promoting dialogue and reconcili -
ation and supporting the establishment of legitimate and effective 
institutions of governance; 
c)  Provide a framework for ensuring that all United Nations and other 
inter national actors pursue their activities at the country-level in a 
coherent and coordinated manner. 
In addition to monitoring and observing cease-fires, multi-dimensional 
United Nations peacekeeping operations are frequently mandated to pro-
vide operational support to national law enforcement agencies; provide 
security at key government installations, ports and other vital infrastruc -
Infrastructure
Employment
Economic governance
Civil administration
Elections
Political process
Security operations
DDR
Rule of law
Human rights
Capacity building
Humanitarian assistance
INDICATIVE POST-
CONFLICT TASKS
STABILIZATION PEACE CONSOLIDATION
Local institutions
LONG-TERM RECOVERY 
AND DEVELOPMENT
World Bank/IMF
UN Country 
Team, Donors
ICRC/NGOs
UN Peacekeeping
Figure 2 The Core Business of Multi-dimensional United Nations 
Peacekeeping Operations
24 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 2 | 25
ture; establish the necessary security conditions for the free flow of people, 
goods and humanitarian assistance; and provide humanitarian mine action 
assistance.
6 By helping to fill the security and public order vacuum that 
often exists in post-conflict settings, multi-dimensional United Nations 
peacekeeping operations play a critical role in securing the peace process, 
and ensuring that humanitarian and development partners are able to work 
in a safe environment. 
In situations of internal armed conflict, civilians account for the vast ma -
jority of casualties. Many civilians are forcibly uprooted within their own 
countries and have specific vulnerabilities arising from their displacement. 
As a result, most multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping opera -
tions are now mandated by the Security Council to protect civilians under 
imminent threat of physical violence. The protection of civilians requires 
concerted and coordinated action among the military, police and civilian 
components of a United Nations peacekeeping operation and must be main-
streamed into the planning and conduct of its core activities. United Nations 
humanitarian agencies and non-governmental organization (NGO) partners 
also undertake a broad range of activities in support of the protection of 
civilians.
7 Close coordination with these actors is, therefore, essential. 
In contrast to traditional United Nations peacekeeping operations, multi-
dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations usually play a direct 
role in political efforts to resolve the conflict and are often mandated by the 
Security Council to provide good offices or promote national political dia-
logue and reconciliation. The fact that multi-dimensional United Nations 
peacekeeping operations enjoy a high degree of international legitimacy and 
represent the collective will of the international community gives them 
considerable leverage over the parties. This leverage can be used to build 
and sustain a political consensus around the peace process, promote good 
governance and maintain pressure on the parties to implement key institu-
tional reforms. 
Multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations also play a 
critical role in ensuring that the activities of the United Nations system and 
other international actors are guided by a common strategic vision. The 
United Nations has the unique ability to mount a truly comprehensive 
response to complex crises and has developed the concept of “integrated 
missions” to maximize the overall impact of its support to countries emerging 
from conflict.
8 To help draw these capabilities together, multi-dimensional 
United Nations peacekeeping operations are normally headed by a Special 
Representative of the Secretary General (SRSG) who has overall authority 
over the activities of the United Nations. The SRSG also establishes the frame-
work guiding the overall activities of the United Nations peacekeeping oper-
ation and those of the United Nations Country Team (UNCT).
9 The SRSG is 
supported in this task by a “triple-hatted” Deputy Special Representative of 
the Secretary-General/Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator 
(DSRSG/RC/HC). This Deputy also serves as the principal interface between 
the United Nations peacekeeping operation and the UNCT; leads the coor-
dination effort for humanitarian, development and recovery activities; and 
brings concerns raised by the UNCT to the attention of the SRSG.
10 
2.4 Peacebuilding Activities 
While the deployment of a multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping 
operation may help to stem violence in the short-term, it is unlikely to result 
in a sustainable peace unless accompanied by programmes designed to pre-
vent the recurrence of conflict. Every situation invariably presents its own 
specific set of challenges. However, experience has shown that the achieve-
ment of a sustainable peace requires progress in at least four critical areas:
11 
a) Restoring the State’s ability to provide security and maintain public order; 
b) Strengthening the rule of law12 and respect for human rights; 
c) Supporting the emergence of legitimate political institutions and partici-
patory processes;
d) Promoting social and economic recovery and development, including 
the safe return or resettlement of internally displaced persons and refu-
gees uprooted by conflict.
26 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 2 | 27
Multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations generally lack 
the programme funding and technical expertise required to comprehen -
sively implement effective peacebuilding programmes. Nevertheless, they 
are often mandated by the Security Council to play a catalytic role in the 
following critical peacebuilding activities:
 Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)  of combatants; 
 Mine action;
 Security Sector Reform (SSR) 13 and other rule of law-related activities;
 Protection and promotion of human rights;
 Electoral assistance; 
 Support to the restoration and extension of State authority.
DDR. DDR is a critical part of efforts to create a secure and stable environ-
ment in which the process of recovery can begin. United Nations multi-
dimensional peacekeeping operations are usually mandated to assist in the 
development and implementation of national DDR programmes.
14 This may 
entail the provision of technical advice; the securing of disarmament and 
cantonment sites; and/or the collection and destruction of weapons, ammu-
nition and other materiel surrendered by the former combatants. Other 
agencies, working in close coordination with the United Nations peace -
keeping operation, are responsible for supporting the critical reintegration 
pro cess, which aims to provide demobilized former combatants with sus -
tainable livelihoods.
Mine action. In many post-conflict settings, landmines and other unex -
ploded ordinance constitute a threat to the safety of civilians and pose a 
major obstacle to successful post-conflict recovery. Mine action is therefore 
necessary to recreate a safe environment conducive to normal life and de-
velopment. In addition to providing emergency mine action assistance, multi-
dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations are often mandated 
to help the national authorities develop medium- and long-term mine action 
plans.
15 
SSR and other rule of law-related activities. SSR is an essential compo -
nent of efforts to re-establish and strengthen the rule of law. Progress in the 
area of SSR is critical to the success of a multi-dimensional United Nations 
peacekeeping operation and helps define its “exit strategy,” which is largely 
dependent on the ability of national security actors and institutions to 
function effectively. Depending on its mandate, a multi-dimensional United 
Nations peacekeeping operation may be called upon to assist in the restruc-
turing, reform and training of the national police and/or armed forces. 
Multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations also play a cat-
alytic role in the strengthening of national judiciary and corrections systems, 
and have also been mandated by the Security Council to promote legal and 
judicial reform or support the development of essential legislation.
Protection and promotion human rights. The abuse and violation of human 
rights is at the heart of most modern conflicts and is also a consequence of 
them. Many of the worst human rights abuses occur during armed conflict 
and the protection of human rights must be at the core of action taken to 
address it. All United Nations entities have a responsibility to ensure that 
human rights are promoted and protected by and within their field opera-
tions.
16 Most United Nations multi-dimensional peacekeeping operations 
are therefore mandated to promote and protect human rights by monitor-
ing and helping to investigate human rights violations and/or developing 
the capacity of national actors and institutions to do so on their own.
17 The 
integration of human rights and the sustainability of human rights pro -
grammes should always be a key factor in the planning of multi-dimensional 
United Nations peacekeeping operations. 
Restoration and extension of State authority. Multi-dimensional United 
Nations peacekeeping operations are frequently called upon to support 
the restoration and extension of State authority. In order to generate reve-
nue and provide basic services to the population, the State must be able to 
exert control over its national territory. Multi-dimensional United Nations 
peacekeeping operations may support the restoration and extension of 
State authority by creating an enabling security environment, providing
28 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 2 | 29
political leader ship or coordinating the efforts of other international actors. 
Support to the restoration or extension of State authority may include efforts 
to develop political participation, as well as operational support to the imme-
diate activities of state institutions. Where relevant, it may also include small-
scale capacity building or support to larger processes of constitutional or 
institutional restructuring. 
Electoral assistance. The holding of free and fair elections is often written 
into the peace agreement underlying a multi-dimensional United Nations 
peacekeeping operation and represents a major milestone towards the estab-
lishment of a legitimate State. Multi-dimensional United Nations peace -
keeping operations are usually mandated to play a direct role in efforts to 
organize, monitor and carry out free and fair elections through the provision 
of security, technical advice, logistical support and other forms of electoral 
assistance. To this end, the electoral component of multi-dimensional United 
Nations peacekeeping operations is normally staffed by experts recommended 
by the United Nations Electoral Assistance Division (EAD) of the Department 
of Political Affairs (DPA). 
Although multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations may 
be required to initiate a limited number of critical peacebuilding activities, 
they are neither designed nor equipped to engage in longer-term institution 
and capacity-building efforts. This is normally the work of development 
actors within the UNCT, as well as key partners outside the United Nations, 
who have the resources and technical expertise required to effectively under-
take long-term institution and capacity-building activities. 
Nevertheless, experience has shown that, in the short-term, a United Nations 
peacekeeping operation may have little choice but to initiate longer-term 
institution and capacity-building efforts, due to the inability of other actors 
to take the lead. Whenever a United Nations peacekeeping operation is 
required to engage in activities of an institution and/or capacity building 
nature, it is essential that it be adequately resourced and that it seek out the 
requisite expertise. In such circumstances, the United Nations peacekeeping 
operation’s efforts should remain focused on preparing the ground for 
those actors within and outside the United Nations system with the man -
date to provide long-term peacebuilding assistance.
2.5 Supporting Other Actors 
There are a number of areas in which the role of United Nations peacekeep-
ing operations is limited to facilitating the activities of other actors within 
and outside the United Nations system, when requested, and within the 
limits of their mandate and available capacity. The promotion of socio-
economic recovery and development and the provision of humanitarian 
assistance are two critical areas in which multi-dimensional United Nations 
peacekeeping operations play a more limited supporting role.
Socio-economic recovery and development is critical to the achievement of 
a lasting peace. Experience has shown that security sector and other reform 
programmes are unlikely to succeed if not supported by transparent and 
effective economic management and civilian oversight systems. DDR efforts 
are likely to fail unless sustainable, alternative livelihoods can be provided 
to demobilized combatants. 
Similarly, the return of refugees and other displaced populations is more 
likely to be smooth and sustainable if the special needs of these persons are 
taken into account in programmes designed to promote socio-economic 
recovery. 
The promotion of socio-economic recovery and development is the respon-
sibility of development partners within and outside the United Nations 
system. Multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations are 
rarely mandated to play a direct role in the promotion of socio-economic 
recovery and development, nor do they have ready access to the requisite 
expertise and programmatic funding. Nevertheless, United Nations peace-
keeping operations may assist the work of development partners by using
30 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 3 | 31
their influence with the national authorities to encourage key reforms, or 
using the good offices of the SRSG and/or the DSRSG/RC/HC to help mobi-
lize donor funding and attention for key development activities. 
Responsibility for the provision of humanitarian assistance rests primarily 
with the relevant civilian United Nations specialized agencies, funds and 
programmes, as well as the range of independent, international and local 
NGOs which are usually active alongside a United Nations peacekeeping 
operation. The primary role of United Nations peacekeeping operations with 
regard to the provision of humanitarian assistance is to provide a secure 
and stable environment within which humanitarian actors may carry out 
their activities.
18 
Multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations often imple -
ment Quick Impact Projects (QIPs), which are small-scale projects, designed 
to benefit the population. QIPs may take a number of forms, including infra-
structure assistance or short-term employment generation activities. QIPs 
establish and build confidence in the mission, its mandate and the peace 
process. They are not a substitute for humanitarian and/or development 
assistance and are used by United Nations multi-dimensional peacekeep -
ing operations to support the mission’s objectives, by building confidence 
in the mission’s mandate and the peace process. 
Coordination and consultation with humanitarian actors
19 in regard to ad-
ministration of QIPs is essential to help alleviate humanitarian concerns 
regarding the danger of conflating political-military activities with their 
humanitarian operations. The mission should be aware that humanitarian 
actors may have concerns about the characterization of QIPs, or Civil Mili-
tary Coordination (CIMIC) projects, “hearts and minds” activities, or other 
security or recovery projects as being of a humanitarian nature, when they see 
these as primarily serving political, security or reconstruction priorities. 
3.1 Applying the Basic Principles of  
United Nations Peacekeeping
Although the practice of United Nations peacekeeping has evolved signifi-
cantly over the past six decades, three basic principles have traditionally 
served and continue to set United Nations peacekeeping operations apart as 
a tool for maintaining international peace and security:
 Consent of the parties
 Impartiality
 Non-use of force except in self-defence and defence of the mandate
These principles are inter-related and mutually reinforcing. It is important 
that their meaning and relationship to each other are clearly understood 
by all those involved in the planning and conduct of United Nations peace-
keeping operations, so that they are applied effectively. Taken together, they 
provide a navigation aid, or compass, for practitioners both in the field and 
at United Nations Headquarters. 
Consent of the parties. United Nations peacekeeping operations are deployed 
with the consent of the main parties to the conflict.
20 This requires a commit-
ment by the parties to a political process and their acceptance of a peace -
keeping operation mandated to support that process. The consent of the  
The Basic Principles of  
United Nations Peacekeeping
Chapter 3
32 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 3 | 33
main parties provides a United Nations peacekeeping operation with the 
necessary freedom of action, both political and physical, to carry out its 
mandated tasks. In the absence of such consent, a United Nations peace -
keeping operation risks becoming a party to the conflict; and being drawn 
towards enforcement action
, and away from its intrinsic role of keeping 
the peace.
In the implementation of its mandate, a United Nations peacekeeping opera-
tion must work continuously to ensure that it does not lose the consent of 
the main parties, while ensuring that the peace process moves forward. 
This requires that all peacekeeping personnel have a thorough understand-
ing of the history and prevailing customs and culture in the mission area, 
as well as the capacity to assess the evolving interests and motivation of 
the parties.
The absence of trust between the parties in a post-conflict environment 
can, at times, make consent uncertain and unreliable. Consent, particularly 
if given grudgingly under international pressure, may be withdrawn in a 
variety of ways when a party is not fully committed to the peace process. 
For instance, a party that has given its consent to the deployment of a United 
Nations peacekeeping operation may subsequently seek to restrict the opera-
tion’s freedom of action, resulting in a de facto withdrawal of consent. The 
complete withdrawal of consent by one or more of the main parties chal -
lenges the rationale for the United Nations peacekeeping operation and will 
likely alter the core assumptions and parameters underpinning the interna-
tional community’s strategy to support the peace process. 
The fact that the main parties have given their consent to the deployment 
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation does not necessarily imply or 
guarantee that there will also be consent at the local level, particularly if the 
main parties are internally divided or have weak command and control 
systems. Universality of consent becomes even less probable in volatile set-
tings, characterized by the presence of armed groups not under the control 
of any of the parties, or by the presence of other spoilers.
21 The peacekeeping 
operation should continuously analyze its operating environment to detect 
and forestall any wavering of consent. A peacekeeping operation must have 
the political and analytical skills, the operational resources, and the will to 
manage situations where there is an absence or breakdown of local consent. 
In some cases this may require, as a last resort, the use of force. 
Impartiality. United Nations peacekeeping operations must implement their 
mandate without favour or prejudice to any party. Impartiality is crucial to 
maintaining the consent and cooperation of the main parties, but should 
not be confused with neutrality or inactivity.
22 United Nations peacekeep-
ers should be impartial in their dealings with the parties to the conflict, but 
not neutral in the execution of their mandate. 
The need for even-handedness towards the parties should not become an 
excuse for inaction in the face of behavior that clearly works against the 
peace process. Just as a good referee is impartial, but will penalize infrac -
tions, so a peacekeeping operation should not condone actions by the parties 
that violate the undertakings of the peace process or the international norms 
and principles that a United Nations peacekeeping operation upholds. 
Notwithstanding the need to establish and maintain good relations with 
the parties, a peacekeeping operation must scrupulously avoid activities 
that might compromise its image of impartiality. A mission should not shy 
away from a rigorous application of the principle of impartiality for fear of 
misinterpretation or retaliation, but before acting it is always prudent to 
ensure that the grounds for acting are well-established and can be clearly 
communicated to all. Failure to do so may undermine the peacekeeping 
operation’s credibility and legitimacy, and may lead to a withdrawal of con-
sent for its presence by one or more of the parties. Where the peacekeeping 
operation is required to counter such breaches, it must do so with transpar-
ency, openness and effective communication as to the rationale and appro-
priate nature of its response. This will help to minimize opportunities to 
manipulate the perceptions against the mission, and help to mitigate the 
potential backlash from the parties and their supporters. Even the best and
34 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 3 | 35
fairest of referees should anticipate criticism from those affected negatively 
and should be in a position to explain their actions.
Non-use of force except in self-defense and defense of the mandate. The 
principle of non-use of force except in self-defense dates back to the first 
deployment of armed United Nations peacekeepers in 1956. The notion of 
self-defense has subsequently come to include resistance to attempts by force-
ful means to prevent the peacekeeping operation from discharging its duties 
under the mandate of the Security Council.
23 United Nations peacekeeping 
operations are not an enforcement tool. However, it is widely understood 
that they may use force at the tactical level, with the authorization of the 
Security Council, if acting in self-defense and defense of the mandate. 
The environments into which United Nations peacekeeping operations are 
deployed are often characterized by the presence of militias, criminal gangs, 
and other spoilers who may actively seek to undermine the peace process 
or pose a threat to the civilian population. In such situations, the Security 
Council has given United Nations peacekeeping operations “robust” man-
dates authorizing them to “use all necessary means” to deter forceful attempts 
to disrupt the political process, protect civilians under imminent threat of 
physical attack, and/or assist the national authorities in maintaining law 
and order. By proactively using force in defense of their mandates, these 
United Nations peacekeeping operations have succeeded in improving the 
security situation and creating an environment conducive to longer-term 
peacebuilding in the countries where they are deployed. 
Although on the ground they may sometimes appear similar, robust peace-
keeping should not be confused with peace enforcement, as envisaged under 
Chapter VII of the Charter. Robust peacekeeping involves the use of force 
at the tactical level with the authorization of the Security Council and con-
sent of the host nation and/or the main parties to the conflict. By contrast, 
peace enforcement does not require the consent of the main parties and may 
involve the use of military force at the strategic or international level, which 
is normally prohibited for Member States under Article 2(4) of the Charter, 
unless authorized by the Security Council. 
A United Nations peacekeeping operation should only use force as a mea-
sure of last resort, when other methods of persuasion have been exhausted, 
and an operation must always exercise restraint when doing so. The ulti -
mate aim of the use of force is to influence and deter spoilers working 
against the peace process or seeking to harm civilians; and not to seek 
their military defeat. The use of force by a United Nations peacekeeping 
operation should always be calibrated in a precise, proportional and appro-
priate manner, within the principle of the minimum force necessary to 
achieve the desired effect, while sustaining consent for the mission and its 
mandate. In its use of force, a United Nations peacekeeping operation should 
always be mindful of the need for an early de-escalation of violence and a 
return to non-violent means of persuasion.
The use of force by a United Nations peacekeeping operation always has 
political implications and can often give rise to unforeseen circumstances. 
Judgments concerning its use will need to be made at the appropriate level 
within a mission, based on a combination of factors including mission capa-
bility; public perceptions; humanitarian impact; force protection; safety and 
security of personnel; and, most importantly, the effect that such action will 
have on national and local consent for the mission. 
The mission-wide ROE for the military and DUF for the police compo -
nents of a United Nations peacekeeping operation will clarify the different 
levels of force that can be used in various circumstances, how each level of 
force should be used, and any authorizations that must be obtained by 
commanders. In the volatile and potentially dangerous environments into 
which contemporary peacekeeping operations are often deployed, these ROE 
and DUF should be sufficiently robust to ensure that a United Nations peace-
keeping operation retains its credibility and freedom of action to implement 
its mandate. The mission leadership should ensure that these ROE and 
DUF are well understood by all relevant personnel in the mission and are 
being applied uniformly.
36 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 3 | 37
3.2 Other Success Factors 
United Nations peacekeeping operations continue to be guided by the basic 
principles of consent, impartiality and the non-use of force except in self-
defense and defense of the mandate. The experiences of the past 15 years 
have shown that in order to succeed, United Nations peacekeeping opera-
tions must also be perceived as legitimate and credible, particularly in the 
eyes of the local population. The United Nations recent experience with 
multi-dimensional peacekeeping has also served to highlight the need for 
United Nations peacekeeping operations to promote national and local 
ownership, in order to contribute to the achievement of a sustainable peace.
Legitimacy. International legitimacy is one of the most important assets of 
a United Nations peacekeeping operation. The international legitimacy of 
a United Nations peacekeeping operation is derived from the fact that it is 
established after obtaining a mandate from the United Nations Security 
Council, which has primary responsibility for the maintenance of interna-
tional peace and security. The uniquely broad representation of Member 
States who contribute personnel and funding to United Nations operations 
further strengthens this international legitimacy. So too does the fact that 
United Nations peacekeeping operations are directed by the United Nations 
Secretary-General, an impartial and well-respected international figure, 
committed to upholding the principles and purposes of the Charter.
The manner in which a United Nations peacekeeping operation conducts 
itself may have a profound impact on its perceived legitimacy on the ground. 
The firmness and fairness with which a United Nations peacekeeping opera-
tion exercises its mandate, the circumspection with which it uses force, the 
discipline it imposes upon its personnel, the respect it shows to local cus -
toms, institutions and laws, and the decency with which it treats the local 
people all have a direct effect upon perceptions of its legitimacy.
The perceived legitimacy of a United Nations peacekeeping operation is 
directly related to the quality and conduct of its military, police and civilian 
personnel. The bearing and behavior of all personnel must be of the highest 
order, commensurate with the important responsibilities entrusted to a 
United Nations peacekeeping operation, and should meet the highest stan-
dards of efficiency, competence and integrity. The mission’s senior leader-
ship must ensure that all personnel are fully aware of the standards of 
conduct that are expected of them and that effective measures are in place to 
prevent misconduct. Civilian, police and military personnel should receive 
mandatory training on sexual exploitation and abuse; and this training 
should be ongoing, as troops rotate in and out of peace operations. There 
must be zero tolerance for any kind of sexual exploitation and abuse, and 
other forms of serious misconduct. Cases of misconduct must be dealt with 
firmly and fairly, to avoid undermining the legitimacy and moral authority 
of the mission. 
Experience has shown that the perceived legitimacy of a United Nations 
peacekeeping operation’s presence may erode over time, if the size of the 
United Nations “footprint” and the behavior of its staff becomes a source of 
local resentment; or if the peacekeeping operation is not sufficiently respon-
sive as the situation stabilizes. Peacekeeping missions must always be aware 
of and respect national sovereignty. As legitimate and capable government 
structures emerge, the role of the international actors may well need to 
diminish quickly. They should seek to promote national and local ownership, 
be aware of emerging local capacities, and be sensitive to the effect that the 
behavior and conduct of the mission has upon the local population. 
Credibility. United Nations peacekeeping operations are frequently deployed 
in volatile, highly stressed environments characterized by the collapse or 
degradation of state structures, as well as enmity, violence, polarization and 
distress. Lawlessness and insecurity may still be prevalent at local levels, 
and opportunists will be present who are willing to exploit any political 
and security vacuum. In such environments, a United Nations peacekeep-
ing operation is likely to be tested for weakness and division by those whose 
interests are threatened by its presence, particularly in the early stages of 
deployment.
38 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I CHAPTER 3 | 39
The credibility of a United Nations peacekeeping operation is a direct reflec-
tion of the international and local communities’ belief in the mission’s ability 
to achieve its mandate. Credibility is a function of a mission’s capability, 
effectiveness and ability to manage and meet expectations. Ideally, in order 
to be credible, a United Nations peacekeeping operation must deploy as 
rapidly as possible, be properly resourced, and strive to maintain a confi -
dent, capable and unified posture. Experience has shown that the early 
establishment of a credible presence can help to deter spoilers and diminish 
the likelihood that a mission will need to use force to implement its man -
date. To achieve and maintain its credibility, a mission must therefore have 
a clear and deliverable mandate, with resources and capabilities to match; 
and a sound mission plan that is understood, communicated and impartially 
and effectively implemented at every level.
The deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation will generate 
high expectations among the local population regarding its ability to meet 
their most pressing needs. A perceived failure to meet these expectations, 
no matter how unrealistic, may cause a United Nations peacekeeping opera-
tion to become a focus for popular dissatisfaction, or worse, active opposition. 
The ability to manage these expectations throughout the life of a peacekeep-
ing operation affects the overall credibility of the mission. Credibility, once 
lost, is hard to regain. A mission with low credibility becomes marginalized 
and ineffective. Its activities may begin to be perceived as having weak or 
frayed legitimacy and consent may be eroded. Critics and opponents of 
the mission may well exploit any such opportunities to this end. The loss 
of credibility may also have a direct impact on the morale of the mission 
personnel, further eroding its effectiveness. Accordingly, the maintenance 
of credibility is fundamental to the success of a mission. 
Promotion of national and local ownership. Multi-dimensional United 
Nations peacekeeping operations are increasingly involved in efforts to help 
countries emerging from protracted internal conflict re-build the foundations 
of a functioning State. The terms of the peace process and/or the Security 
Council mandate will shape the nature of a peacekeeping operation’s role 
in this area. In some instances, state and local capacity may be so weak that 
the mission is required to temporarily assume certain functions, either directly , 
as in the case of transitional administration, or in support of the State. Other 
situations require less intrusive support to state authority, and sometimes 
no such support at all. The nature and scale of a particular United Nations 
peacekeeping operation’s role will depend on its mandate, the gravity of the 
situation on the ground, the resources the international community is will-
ing to invest and an assessment of the availability of capable, credible and 
legitimate partners within the host nation. Each of these variables may change 
during the course of a United Nations peacekeeping operation’s lifetime and 
require adjustments in the peacekeeping operation’s approach.
National and local ownership is critical to the successful implementation of 
a peace process. In planning and executing a United Nations peacekeeping 
operation’s core activities, every effort should be made to promote national 
and local and ownership and to foster trust and cooperation between national 
actors. Effective approaches to national and local ownership not only rein-
force the perceived legitimacy of the operation and support mandate imple-
mentation, they also help to ensure the sustainability of any national capacity 
once the peacekeeping operation has been withdrawn.
Partnerships with national actors should be struck with due regard to impar-
tiality , wide representation, inclusiveness, and gender considerations. Missions 
must recognize that multiple divergent opinions will exist in the body poli-
tic of the host country. All opinions and views need to be understood, ensur-
ing that ownership and participation are not limited to small elite groups. 
National and local ownership must begin with a strong understanding of 
the national context. This includes understanding of the political context, as 
well as the wider socio-economic context. 
A mission must be careful to ensure that the rhetoric of national ownership 
does not replace a real understanding of the aspirations and hope of the 
population, and the importance of allowing national capacity to re-emerge 
quickly from conflict to lead critical political and development processes.
40 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I ENDNOTES | 41
The mission will need to manage real tensions between the requirement, 
in some instances, for rapid transformational change from the status quo ex 
ante, and resistance to change from certain powerful actors who have a 
vested interest in maintaining the status quo. The ownership of change 
must be built, first, through dialogue. Political, financial and other forms 
of international leverage may be required to influence the parties on specific 
issues, but those should only be used in support of the wider aspirations 
for peace in the community.
The activities of a multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping opera-
tion must be informed by the need to support and, where necessary, build 
national capacity. Accordingly, any displacement of national or local capacity 
should be avoided wherever possible. A multi-dimensional United Nations 
peacekeeping operation may be obliged, in the short-term, to take on impor-
tant state-like functions, such as the provision of security and the mainte -
nance of public order. However, these functions should be conducted in a 
consultative manner. The aim must always be to restore, as soon as possible, 
the ability of national actors and institutions to assume their responsibili -
ties and to exercise their full authority, with due respect for internationally 
accepted norms and standards. In building national capacity, women and 
men should have equal opportunities for training. Targeted efforts may need 
to address gender inequalities. 
1 Although the United Nations Charter gives primary responsibility to the Security Council for the 
maintenance of international peace and security, General Assembly resolution 377 (V) of 3 November 
1950, also known as the “Uniting for Peace” resolution, states that: 
“. . . if the Security Council, because of lack of unanimity of the permanent members, fails to exercise its pri -
mary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security in any case where there appears to 
be a threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression, the General Assembly shall consider the matter 
immediately with a view to making appropriate recommendations to Members for collective measures, includ -
ing in the case of a breach of the peace or act of aggression, the use of armed force when necessary, to maintain 
or restore international peace and security.” 
General Assembly resolution 1000 (ES-1) of 5 November 1956 authorizing the establishment of the 
First United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF I) was adopted under procedure established by the 
“Uniting for Peace” resolution.
2 It is widely recognized that the international community’s objectives in countries emerging from 
conflict will be better served if women and girls are protected and if arrangements are put in place 
to allow for the full participation of women in the peace process. Security Council resolution 1325 
(2000) on women, peace and security therefore calls on all United Nations peacekeeping operations 
to mainstream gender issues into operational activities. 
3 Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) stresses the responsibility of United Nations peacekeeping 
operations to ensure a coordinated response to children and armed conflict concerns and to monitor 
and report to the Secretary-General. Under resolution 1612 (2005) the Secretary-General is required 
to ensure that the need for, and the number and roles of Child Protection Advisers are systemati -
cally assessed during the preparation of each United Nations peacekeeping operation . In United 
Nations peacekeeping operations where there are country monitoring and reporting Task Forces on 
CAAC, these are headed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG). 
4 Security Council resolution 1674 (2006) reaffirms the Council’s commitment to ensuring that the 
mandates of peacekeeping operations, where appropriate and on a case-by-case basis, include pro -
visions regarding: (i) the protection of civilians, particularly those under imminent threat of physical 
danger within their zones of operation, (ii) the facilitation of the provision of humanitarian assis -
tance, and (iii) the creation of conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable 
return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Endnotes
42 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I ENDNOTES | 43
5 In most post-conflict environments, a peace accord or other agreement, such as a cease-fire agreement 
or agreement on disengagement of forces, is likely to be in effect and include provisions directly 
related to the peacekeeping operation. The peace accord may be quite detailed, spelling out the 
various phases of the peace process and the specifics of post-conflict arrangements. Or, it could be 
more general, leaving details for future negotiation. The signatories to a peace agreement have an 
obligation to abide by the terms of the agreement. In certain cases, the United Nations or key Member 
States have also signed peace agreements as guarantors, who undertake to ensure that the peace pro-
cess remains on track.
6 Even if the clearance of landmines and other explosive remnants of war (ERW) has not been explic -
itly mandated by the Security Council, humanitarian mine action activities will invariably need to be 
undertaken by a mission, as an issue of United Nations staff safety and security. 
7 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF), and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) have express pro -
tection mandates. In an increasing number of countries, one of these agencies will be responsible for 
the overall coordination of the protection response among humanitarian actors through a dedicated 
protection “cluster” or working group. The Mine Action Service of DPKO is also designated as the 
focal point for mine action within the Protection Cluster Working Group (PCWG), and is actively 
engaged with these agencies and partners.
8 See Secretary-General’s Note of Guidance on Integrated Missions, clarifying the Role, Responsibility 
and Authority of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the Deputy Special Repre -
sentative of the Secretary-General/Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordination, 17 January 
2006.
9 See para. 5 of the Secretary-General’s Note of Guidance on Integrated Missions.
10 See Secretary-General’s Note of Guidance on Integrated Missions, para. 22 .
11 See Report of the Secretary-General, No Exit without Strategy: Security Council Decision-making 
and the Closure or Transition of United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, S/ 2001/394.
12 According to Decision No. 2006/47 of the Secretary General’s Policy Committee, the rule of law in 
the context of conflict and post-conflict settings includes the following sectors: transitional justice; 
strengthening of national justice systems and institutions, including police and law enforcement 
agencies and prisons; and other priority areas such as victim and witness protection and assistance, 
anti-corruption, organized crime, trans-national crime, and trafficking and drugs.
13 According to Decision No. 2007/11 of the Secretary-General’s Policy Committee: “The objective of a 
United Nations approach to SSR is effective, accountable and sustainable security institutions oper -
ating under civilian control within the framework of the rule of law and respect for human rights. 
The focus should be on executive security agencies, armed forces, police and law enforcement agen -
cies, relevant line ministries and judicial and civil society oversight bodies.” 
14 The role of United Nations peacekeeping operations in this area is defined in the United Nations 
Integrated DDR Standards (IDDRS), available at www.unddr.org/iddrs.
15 The United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) is responsible for building the capacity of the 
national institutions that will ultimately assume responsibility for long-term mine action manage -
ment within the country. 
16 Decision No. 2005/24 of the Secretary-General’s Policy Committee on Human Rights in Integrated 
Missions directs that human rights be fully integrated into peace operations and all human rights 
functions coordinated by one component.
17 The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) is responsible for providing exper-
tise, guidance and support to the human rights components of multi-dimensional United Nations 
peacekeeping operations. 
18 Depending on the situation, and when specifically requested by the relevant organizations, the 
peacekeeping operation may also need to provide more direct forms of assistance to humanitarian 
actors, such as escorting convoys or transporting humanitarian aid and personnel. Specific requests 
for assistance should be managed through standing coordination structures of the mission, and with 
reference to the United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator. 
19 The term ‘humanitarian’ is often applied loosely to a wide group of actors and activities, whereas 
many in the humanitarian community take a more restricted interpretation to embrace only those 
delivering life-saving assistance delivered in accordance with the Humanitarian principles. United 
Nations peacekeepers should respect this distinction.
20 The Security Council may take enforcement action without the consent of the main parties to the 
conflict, if it believes that the conflict presents a threat to international peace and security. This, 
however, would be a peace enforcement operation. It may also take enforcement action for humani -
tarian or protection purposes; where there is no political process and where the consent of the major 
parties may not be achievable, but where civilians are suffering. Since the mid- 1990s, enforcement 
action has been carried out by ad hoc coalitions of Member States or regional organizations acting 
under United Nations Security Council authorization. 
21 Spoilers are individuals or parties who believe that the peace process threatens their power and 
interests, and will therefore work to undermine it. 
22 Humanitarian actors also use the terms impartiality and neutrality as two of the fundamental prin -
ciples of humanitarian action, along with humanity and independence. However, their meanings 
are different. It is important to be aware of these differences, in order to avoid misunderstandings. 
For the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, in particular, impartiality means being 
guided solely by needs, making no discrimination on the basis of nationality, race, gender, class, or 
religious/political beliefs; while neutrality means to take no sides in hostilities or engage, at any 
time, in controversies of a political, racial, religious or ideological nature.
23 See para. 5 of the Report of the Secretary–General on the Implementation of Security Council resolu -
tion 340 (1973), of 27 October 1973, (S/11052/Rev.1).
44 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART I ENDNOTES | 45
PART II
Planning United Nations  
Peacekeeping Operations
United Nations peacekeeping operations are likely to be 
far more effective when deployed as part of a United 
Nations system-wide response based on a clear and 
shared understanding of priorities, and on the willing -
ness of all actors to contribute to achieving common 
objectives. Integrated planning is at the heart of the 
United Nations’ efforts to develop such a response.
46 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART II CHAPTER 4 | 47
4.1 Assessing the Options for United Nations Engagement 
It is the prerogative of the United Nations Security Council, acting in its 
capacity as the organ with primary responsibility for the maintenance of 
international peace and security, to determine when and where a United 
Nations peacekeeping operation should be deployed. The Security Council 
responds to crises on a case-by-case basis and it has a wide range of options 
at its disposal. Nevertheless, without prejudice to its ability to do so and to 
respond flexibly as circumstances require, the Security Council has indicated 
that it may take the following factors into account when the establishment of 
new peacekeeping operations is under consideration:
 Whether a situation exists the continuation of which is likely to endanger 
or constitute a threat to international peace and security;
 Whether regional or sub-regional organizations and arrangements exist 
and are ready and able to assist in resolving the situation;
 Whether a cease-fire exists and whether the parties have committed them-
selves to a peace process intended to reach a political settlement;
 Whether a clear political goal exists and whether it can be reflected in the 
mandate;
 Whether a precise mandate for a United Nations operation can be  
formulated;
Chapter 4 
Deciding to Deploy a United Nations  
Peacekeeping Operation
Chapter 5 
Planning a United Nations Peacekeeping Operation
Deciding to Deploy a United Nations  
Peacekeeping Operation
Chapter 4
48 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART II CHAPTER 4 | 49
 Whether the safety and security of United Nations personnel can be 
reasonably ensured, including in particular whether reasonable guar -
antees can be obtained from the principal parties or factions regarding 
the safety and security of United Nations personnel.
1
The United Nations Secretariat plays a critical role in helping the Security 
Council determine whether the deployment of a United Nations peacekeep-
ing operation is the most appropriate course of action, or whether other 
options for United Nations engagement should be considered. As a particu-
lar conflict develops, worsens, or approaches resolution, consultations will 
normally take place among Member States, the Secretariat, the parties on 
the ground, regional actors, and potential contributing countries. One or 
more of the parties may even insist on a United Nations role as a precondi-
tion for signing a peace agreement. 
During this initial phase of consultations, the United Nations Secretary-
General may decide to convene a Strategic Assessment of the situation, involv-
ing all relevant United Nations actors, with the aim of identifying possible 
options for United Nations engagement. The Strategic Assessment would 
likely involve consultations with Member States, including the potential 
host government and TCCs/PCCs, as well as regional and other intergov-
ernmental organizations, and other key external partners. The Strategic 
Assessment allows United Nations planners and decision-makers to con -
duct a system-wide analysis of the situation, identify conflict resolution and 
peace-building priorities, and define the appropriate framework for United 
Nations engagement. 
As soon as security conditions permit, the Secretariat usually deploys a 
Technical Assessment Mission (TAM) to the country or territory where the 
deployment of a United Nations mission is envisaged. The role of the TAM 
is to analyze and assess the overall security, political humanitarian, human 
rights and military situation on the ground, and the implications of an 
eventual United Nations peacekeeping operation. As such, the TAM may 
also consist of representatives from several departments and offices with-
in the Secretariat, as well as the specialized agencies, funds and programs, 
and should involve relevant actors from the UNCT.
Based on the findings and recommendations of the TAM, the United Nations 
Secretary-General normally issues a report to the Security Council, recom-
mending options for the possible establishment of a United Nations peace-
keeping operation, including its size and resources. The Security Council 
may then pass a resolution authorizing the United Nations peacekeeping 
operation’s deployment and determining its size and mandate.
4.2 Key Lessons for Planners and Decision Makers
Pressures to halt the slaughter of civilians or avert a humanitarian catas -
trophe may lead the Security Council to deploy a United Nations peace -
keeping operation in circumstances that are far from ideal. Nevertheless, 
the Secretariat has a responsibility to provide the Security Council with an 
accurate assessment of the risks associated with its decision to deploy a 
United Nations peacekeeping operation, and ensure that its mandate and 
capabilities are tailored to the requirements of the situation. The lessons 
learned over the past six decades indicate that a United Nations peacekeeping 
operation is unlikely to succeed when one or more of the following condi-
tions are not in place.
A peace to keep. A United Nations peacekeeping operation can only succeed 
if the parties on the ground are genuinely committed to resolving the con-
flict through a political process. A United Nations peacekeeping operation 
deployed in the absence of such a commitment runs the risk of becoming 
paralyzed or, worse still, being drawn into the conflict. The signing of a 
cease-fire or peace agreement is an important indicator of whether or not 
the parties are ready to engage in a political dialogue. However, the signing 
of a cease-fire or peace agreement may not always translate into a genuine 
commitment to peace, particularly if the parties have done so as a result of 
international pressure.
50 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART II CHAPTER 4 | 51
Judging the parties’ real intentions is never easy and the deployment of a 
United Nations peacekeeping operation always entails an element of risk. 
Nevertheless, in gauging the parties’ level of commitment to a peace pro-
cess, the Secretariat should always be prepared to tell the Security Council 
what it needs to know, rather than what it may want to hear. If the parties 
do not appear committed to resolving their differences through peaceful 
means, the Security Council should be encouraged to explore the full range 
of options at its disposal, such as the deployment of an advance mission, or 
the reinforcement of mediation and other peacemaking efforts. 
Positive regional engagement. Many of the crises before the Security Coun-
cil are regional in character. Rarely can the problems in one state be treated 
in isolation from its neighbours. The attitude of neighbouring states can be 
as important a factor in determining the viability of a peace process, as the 
commitment of the local parties, some of whom may even be acting as prox-
ies for neighbouring states. The role regional actors or organizations may be 
playing in the conflict must be carefully examined by the Secretariat and the 
Security Council when the establishment of a United Nations peacekeep -
ing operation is under consideration. A managed, positive and supportive 
regional engagement strategy can pay enormous dividends in encouraging 
the parties to stay the course and prevent the spread of conflict. To exclude 
regional actors from the peace process may have a more detrimental effect 
than managing their participation.
The full backing of a united Security Council. While the establishment 
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation only requires nine votes from 
the Security Council’s fifteen members, anything other than unanimous 
Security Council backing can be a serious handicap. Divisions within the 
Security Council are likely to send mixed messages to the parties, and may 
undermine the legitimacy and authority of the mission in the eyes of the 
main parties and the population as a whole. Any perception that the Secu-
rity Council is not fully committed to the implementation of a peace agree-
ment is likely to embolden spoilers at both the local and regional levels, as 
well as hamper contributions from Member States. On the other hand, by 
showing the parties that it is actively engaged in the peace process and is 
determined to stay the course, the Security Council can greatly enhance a 
United Nations peacekeeping operation’s impact on the ground.
A clear and achievable mandate with resources to match. When the Secu-
rity Council decides to deploy a United Nations peacekeeping operation, the 
Secretariat must help to ensure that the mandate is clear and achievable. 
Since the credibility of a United Nations peacekeeping operation is depend-
ent on it being able to carry out its mandated tasks, it is important to ensure 
that the mandate reflects the level of resources that contributing nations are 
able and willing to provide. There must be reason to believe that Member 
States will be ready to finance the operation, to contribute the necessary 
military and police personnel and to provide it with political support, on a 
continuing basis. If the situation on the ground requires the deployment of 
capabilities that a United Nations peacekeeping operation is unlikely to have, 
the Security Council should be encouraged to consider alternative options. 
The deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation is just the start 
of a long-term, but volatile peace and capacity-building process. In recom-
mending to the Security Council the resources and capabilities needed for 
the peacekeeping operation, the Secretariat and its partners should also 
conduct a rigorous assessment of the requirements for longer-term engage-
ment. In conducting this assessment, worst case scenarios should be examined 
as an aid in planning. Planning based solely on short-term engagement and 
best case scenarios has rarely proven to be a successful basis for the deploy-
ment of a United Nations peacekeeping mission and should be avoided. 
If changing circumstances on the ground warrant an adjustment to a mis -
sion’s mandate, this should be done explicitly on the basis of an objective 
re-evaluation of the United Nations role. If a change in mandate entails a 
significant increase in the number, scope or complexity of the tasks assigned 
to a mission, the Secretariat should seek the necessary additional resources 
to match a revised mandate. Similarly, if the mission’s role is augmented or 
diminished, then the types and amount of resources required should also 
be adjusted.
52 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART II CHAPTER 5 | 53
4.3 The Importance of Consultations with  
Contributing Countries
The United Nations has no standing army or police force. For every new 
United Nations peacekeeping operation, the Secretariat must seek contribu-
tions of military, police and other personnel from Member States who are 
under no obligation to provide them. Sustained consultations with TCCs/
PCCs and other contributing countries at all stages of the planning and 
decision-making process are therefore critical to the success of any United 
Nations peacekeeping operation. 
Consultations with TCCs/PCCs may take several forms and should be held 
at all key stages in the life of a United Nations peacekeeping operation, 
including: a) the development of the concept of operations and the elabora-
tion of the mandate of a new operation; b) any change in the mandate, in 
particular the broadening or narrowing of the scope of the mission, the 
introduction of new or additional functions or components, or a change in 
the authorization to use force; c) the renewal of the mandate; d) significant 
or serious political, military or humanitarian developments; e) a rapid dete-
rioration of the security situation on the ground; f) the termination, with -
drawal or scaling down in size of the operation, including the transition from 
peacekeeping to post-conflict peacebuilding; and g) before and after Secu-
rity Council missions to a specific peacekeeping operation.
2
Since United Nations peacekeeping operations would not be possible with-
out the participation of contributing countries, it is critical that every effort 
be made to ensure that they are fully consulted on any decisions that may 
affect their personnel on the ground. Additionally, regular consultations 
with contributing countries provide the Secretariat with a valuable opportu-
nity to consider their views on a range of strategic and operational issues. 
Planning a United Nations  
Peacekeeping Operation
Chapter 5
5.1 The Integrated Approach
As discussed in Chapter 2, United Nations peacekeeping began during the 
Cold War as a tool for managing inter-state conflicts. Since then, a new gen-
eration of multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations has 
emerged. These multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operations 
are deployed as one part of a broader international effort to assist countries 
making the transition from conflict to sustainable peace. 
Successful recovery from conflict requires the engagement of a broad range 
of actors – including the national authorities and the local population – in 
a long-term peacebuilding effort. The rationale for the integration of activi-
ties undertaken by the United Nations is to better assist countries to make 
this transition from conflict to sustainable peace. A multi-dimensional United 
Nations peacekeeping operation is likely to be far more effective when it is 
deployed as part of a United Nations system-wide response based on a clear 
and shared understanding of priorities, and on a willingness on the part 
of all United Nations actors to contribute to the achievement of common 
objectives. Integrated planning is at the heart of the United Nations efforts 
to develop such a response.
An integrated mission is one in which there is a shared vision among all 
United Nations actors as to the strategic objectives of the United Nations 
presence at the country-level. This strategy should reflect a shared under-
54 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART II CHAPTER 5 | 55
standing of the operating environment and agreement on how to maximize 
the effectiveness, efficiency, and impact of the United Nations overall re -
sponse. Structural or programmatic integration between United Nations 
actors must be driven by an assessment of whether or not it will add real 
value and improve the impact of the United Nations engagement. An inte-
grated mission’s structure should be derived from an in-depth apprecia -
tion of the specific country setting and an honest assessment of the United 
Nations capacities to respond effectively. It should be driven by the United 
Nations strategy for that country and the resources available to the United 
Nations. 
Integrated planning may, at times, appear to slow the deployment of a 
United Nations peacekeeping operation. Therefore, a balance must be struck 
between the need to ensure that developmental, human rights, gender and 
other perspectives are fully taken into account, and the need to deliver a 
timely and effective humanitarian and security response. Finding such a 
balance is not easy and requires cooperation, coordination and communi -
cation. Ultimately, integrated planning helps to ensure that all the actors 
in the United Nations system, when deployed in the field, are pointing in 
the same direction.
Forcing integration where it is not needed may well be counter-productive. 
Chapter 7 provides more detail on managing integrated missions in the 
field. In situations where there is little or no peace to keep, integration may 
create difficulties for humanitarian and development partners, particularly 
if they are perceived to be too closely linked to the political and security 
objectives of the peacekeeping mission. In the worst case, integration may 
endanger their operations and the lives of their personnel. Integrated plan-
ning should also bear these worse case scenarios in mind and ensure appro-
priate dialogue, communication and contingency planning. 
5.2 The Integrated Mission Planning Process (IMPP) 
The United Nations has adopted an Integrated Mission Planning Process 
(IMPP) to facilitate the planning of multi-dimensional United Nations peace-
keeping operations. 3 The IMPP is intended to help the United Nations 
system arrive at a common understanding of its strategic objectives in a 
particular country by engaging all relevant parts of the United Nations sys-
tem. It aims to ensure that the right people are at the planning table, that 
the right issues are being discussed, and that the appropriate authorities and 
accountabilities are in place to motivate integrated thinking and planning. 
Full application of the IMPP may not always be necessary or feasible since 
the deployment of an integrated mission is just one among a range of pos-
sible options for United Nations engagement. Nevertheless, even in situa-
tions requiring a more traditional United Nations peacekeeping response, 
every effort should be made to ensure that planning is conducted in close 
coordination with relevant United Nations system partners and other key 
stakeholders. 
The IMPP should be driven by a realistic assessment of existing capacities 
at country-level, in order to avoid duplication of effort and ensure the most 
efficient use of the United Nations limited resources. Any plans based on 
overly ambitious, unfunded or aspirational capacities must be carefully 
scrutinized at this stage to avoid unrealistic planning assumptions. The 
UNCT should, therefore, be involved in the IMPP from the outset and con-
tinue to play an active role in planning efforts within the context of an inte-
grated mission. These considerations should be factored into the IMPP and 
reflected in the accompanying budgetary process. 
The IMPP does not and cannot take over all other planning processes. The 
number of international and national actors involved in efforts to support 
the process of post-conflict recovery means that, in practice, planning can-
not always be fully coherent or integrated. These actors have different 
roles, decision-making processes, deployment time-lines, procedures, budget-
ary pressures and supervising authorities. However, the IMPP does provide
56 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART II ENDNOTES | 57
an inclusive framework to engage external partners, such as the International 
Financial Institutions (IFIs), regional organizations or bilateral donors. The 
cooperation of such external partners is necessary for the United Nations to 
achieve its broader objectives. 
Peacekeeping planners need to be aware of the other assessment and plan-
ning processes that may be going on alongside the IMPP and actively seek to 
create substantive linkages between them wherever possible. Such processes 
include the Consolidated Humanitarian Appeal (CHAP)/Consolidated Appeal 
(CAP), Common Country Assessment (CCA)/UN Development Assistance 
Framework (UNDAF), Joint Assessment Missions (JAM)/Post-Conflict Needs 
Assessments (PCNA) and Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSP). The 
IMPP should draw on and capture any elements contained in these parallel 
planning frameworks that are relevant to the achievement of the United 
Nations overall strategic objectives. Development of these linkages will help 
prevent circumstances in which uncoordinated initiatives create friction 
and spark conflict among the many actors.
The IMPP should be seen as a dynamic, continuous process allowing for 
activities and objectives to be revised, as the mission’s understanding of its 
operational environment grows and as that environment itself changes. 
Significant developments at the country level – for example following na -
tional elections, or a changed political, security or humanitarian situation 
– may require a change in the United Nations strategic objectives, or a recon-
figuration of the overall role and/or capabilities of the United Nations peace-
keeping operation. Such a revision may also be requested by the United 
Nations Security Council. In such situations, the SRSG/HOM will be re -
sponsible for revising the strategic framework guiding the United Nations 
system’s activities on the ground as the basis for the Secretary-General’s 
report to the Security Council, which is ultimately responsible for deciding 
whether the mission’s mandate should be revised. 
1 Statement by the President of the Security Council S/PRST/ 1994/22, of 3 May 1994.
2 Security Council resolution 1353 (2001), of 13 June 2001, on Measures for Cooperation with Troop 
Contributing Countries 
3 The IMPP was formally endorsed through a decision of the Secretary–General’s Policy Committee, 
on 13 June 2006. A comprehensive set of implementation guidelines for the IMPP are currently under 
development, in coordination with field missions and Headquarters planners.
Endnotes
58 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART II ENDNOTES | 59
PART III
The Art of Successful  
Mandate Implementation
The arrangements for directing and managing modern 
United Nations peacekeeping operations are distinct 
from those of other organizations, particularly those only 
deploying a military capability. United Nations peace -
keeping has evolved into a complex, multi-dimensional 
enterprise, involving personnel from a wide range of 
nationalities, disciplines and professional cultures  
pursuing multiple lines of activity.
60 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 6 | 61
6.1 Typical Phases of Deployment 
Part III of this document addresses some of the major challenges facing 
United Nation peacekeeping operations during the various phases of deploy-
ment. Although the trajectory of each United Nations peacekeeping opera-
tion evolves differently , for planning purposes the lifecycle of a United Nations 
peacekeeping operation can be divided into the following broad phases, 
shown simplistically in Figure 3 below:
 Mission Start-Up
 Mandate Implementation
 Transition (hand-over, withdrawal and liquidation)
In general, the scale and tempo of operations rise steadily during initial 
deployment and start-up, reaching a plateau during mandate implementa-
tion, and finally tapering off once hand-over and withdrawal begin. Although 
they are conceptually distinct, the various phases of the mission lifecycle 
may overlap. There will also be spikes of activity during implementation as 
critical milestones and tasks are achieved, for example, during a large DDR 
programme, or during the period leading up to an election, or the critical 
months and years following formation of a government. 
Each phase of deployment presents its own specific challenges. During start-
up, the mission strives to reach an initial operating capability (IOC), and 
Chapter 6 
Deployment and Start-Up of United Nations 
Peacekeeping Operations
Chapter 7 
Managing United Nations Peacekeeping Operations
Chapter 8
Supporting and Sustaining United Nations  
Peacekeeping Operations
Chapter 9 
Maintaining Support for the Mission 
Chapter 10 
Transition and Exit
Deployment and Start-Up of United Nations 
Peacekeeping Operations
Chapter 6
62 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 6 | 63
eventually a full operating capability (FOC) so that mandate implementa-
tion can begin in all areas of deployment. During the implementation phase, 
efforts are focused on carrying out the tasks set out in the Security Council 
mandate and achieving the objectives set out in the mission plan. The pro-
cess of handover, withdrawal and liquidation begins following a decision 
by the Security Council. It involves the departure of mission personnel follow-
ing the hand-over of all remaining tasks to partners, and the final disposal 
of mission assets and infrastructure in accordance with United Nations rules.
The remainder of this chapter describes the United Nations mission deploy-
ment and start-up concept, and the challenges associated with managing 
the mission start-up process. Chapters 7, 8 and 9 describe the challenges of 
managing, supporting and sustaining large integrated missions, as well as 
managing their impact on the host country. Finally, Chapter 10 turns to the 
challenges of transition, hand-over to partner organizations and withdrawal.
6.2 The Mission Start-Up Process
The first months after a cease-fire or peace accord are often the most criti -
cal for establishing a stable peace and bolstering the credibility of a new 
operation. Opportunities lost during this period are hard to regain. The 
General Assembly has thus endorsed a requirement to be able to establish 
a traditional peacekeeping mission within 30 days and a multi-dimensional 
mission within 90 days of the authorization of a Security Council mandate. 
In reality, there is no set sequence of events for establishing a United Nations 
peacekeeping operation. The lead time required to deploy a mission varies 
and depends on a number factors, particularly the will of Member States to 
contribute troops and police to a particular operation, and the availability 
of financial and other resources. For missions with highly complex man -
dates or difficult logistics, or where peacekeepers face significant security 
risk, it may take several weeks or even months to assemble and deploy the 
necessary elements. The 90-day timeline for deploying the first elements 
of a multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operation is, thus, a 
notional target.
The term ‘mission start-up’ is used to describe the earliest phase of estab-
lishing a mission in the field. During mission start-up, the main priority is to 
bring internal mission processes, structures and services to an initial level 
of operating capability so that mandate implementation can begin across the 
mission area.
As shown in Figure 4, the mission start-up process covers several notional 
stages, even though these may overlap in practice, as follows:
 Pre-deployment is largely a Headquarters responsibility and involves 
many tasks such as the United Nations budgetary process, pre-deployment 
visits to TCCs/PCCs to assess readiness, the negotiation of a Status of 
Mission/Status of Forces Agreements (SOMA/SOFA), the mobilization 
of Strategic Deployment Stocks (SDS), and the tendering of major sup-
ply and service contracts for the mission; 
 Rapid deployment involves the deployment of a small advance team to 
commence the establishment of mission premises and other prerequi -
site infrastructure and administrative systems, to allow for the reception 
of larger numbers of staff and contingents as start-up progresses; 
Figure 3 Typical Phases of Deployment
Rapid deployment
Mission Start-up
Withdrawal/  
Liquidation
Transition/Hand-over
Implementation
64 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 6 | 65
early weeks, sometimes referred to as a ‘honeymoon period,’ to push ahead 
political progress with the parties so as to sustain the momentum of the 
peace process. During this critical phase, it is essential that mission leaders 
and personnel adhere to the basic principles of United Nations peacekeeping, 
as outlined in Chapter 3 above, and actively seek to establish the mission’s 
legitimacy and credibility in the eyes of the parties, the host population and 
the international community, as a whole.
Effective leadership and strong managerial skills are at a premium during 
start-up. If basic systems and procedures are not established early on, this 
can cause compounding confusion as the mission rapidly expands during 
start-up. If effective and streamlined institutional processes to control the 
fragmentation of a large and diverse mission are not installed during the 
start-up period – such as establishing mission decision-making forums, 
information sharing and information management protocols, reporting lines, 
etc. – they will become increasingly difficult to introduce later.
Leadership and conflict management are essential skills for a mission start-
up manager. Few , if any , of the mission staff will have worked together before. 
Peacekeeping personnel will come from diverse national and professional 
backgrounds (including from significantly different civilian, military and 
police working cultures) which may cause friction in a pressurized start-up 
environment. Internal tensions must be managed proactively, during the 
early months, to minimize misunderstandings and avoid resentments that 
could pollute staff relations over the long-term. Mission leaders must under-
score the need for all components to work towards shared objectives under 
the leadership of a cohesive and collaborative mission leadership team. 
MHQs Offices
Field Offices
Field Offices
MHQs Offices
Logistics Hub
Liaison Offices
Mission HQs
Start-Up
Overall Mission HQs
IOC Established
Rapid 
Deployment
Pre- 
Deployment
RAPID DEPLOYMENT
FUNCTIONAL/FIELD OFFICE START-UP
MISSION HQ & MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS START-UP
PRE-DEPLOYMENT
Figure 4 The Mission Start-Up Process
 Mission headquarters start-up is the period when the mission leader -
ship team arrives, managerial and command and control systems are 
formed and increasing numbers of substantive and support personnel 
begin arriving in-mission to help achieve an IOC. It also involves the 
establishment of liaison offices and logistics hubs, if required;
 Functional component and field office start-up occurs alongside the 
establishment of the central structures of mission headquarters and in-
volves the coordinated establishment of the different substantive civilian, 
police and military command and managerial capacities. It also involves 
the start-up of sector headquarters and field offices of the mission.
6.3 Managing the Mission Start–Up Process
Mission start-up can be a fast-paced and seemingly chaotic experience. 
Small numbers of staff are pitted against time to put in place the founda -
tions of a complex, new mission, often in unknown and volatile operating 
environments. At the same time, new staff and contingents begin to deploy 
and begin scoping out initial operations. Mission leaders must also use these
66 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 7 | 67
7.1 The Relationship between Headquarters and the Field 
The arrangements established by the United Nations to direct and manage 
its peacekeeping operations are distinct from those of other organizations, 
particularly those only deploying a military capability.
1 This is largely due 
to the fact that United Nations peacekeeping has evolved into a complex, 
multi-dimensional enterprise, involving personnel from a wide range of 
nationalities, disciplines and professional cultures pursuing multiple lines 
of activity.
As depicted in Figure 5, the levels of authority in United Nations peacekeep-
ing operations are not as clear-cut as they are in military organizations. 
This difference must be noted when the United Nations is working in the 
field with partner organizations. 
Within the United Nations Secretariat, DPKO is responsible for providing 
United Nations peacekeeping operations with policy guidance and strategic 
direction, while DFS is responsible for providing logistical and administra-
tive support. In order to ensure unity of command at the Headquarters 
level, the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support reports to the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on all peacekeeping related 
matters. Standing Integrated Operational Teams (IOTs), located within DPKO 
and managed by the Office of Operations (OO), bring together, in a formal 
structure, political, military, police and mission support personnel, sup -
Managing United Nations  
Peacekeeping Operations
Chapter 7
Figure 5 Authority, Command and Control in Multi-dimensional United 
Nations Peacekeeping Operations
Civilian units
Regional Offices
UN Secretariat
Component Heads
Military units Police units
Security Council
Secretary-General
Head of Mission
Mission Headquarters  
and Leadership Team
STRATEGIC
OPERATIONAL
TACTICAL
68 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 7 | 69
ported by other specialist capacities as required, to provide integrated teams 
to support missions, and to provide integrated policy advice and guidance 
for senior DPKO and DFS staff. These teams enable delegation of decision 
making and increased accountability; and they provide a principal entry 
point for missions, TCCs/PCCs and partners to engage in the planning and 
conduct of integrated peacekeeping operations.
In the field, the Head of Mission (HOM) exercises operational authority over 
the United Nations peacekeeping operation’s activities, including military, 
police and civilian resources. In the case of military personnel provided by 
Member States, these personnel are placed under the operational control 
of the United Nations Force Commander or head of military component, 
but not under United Nations command. However, once assigned under 
United Nations operational control, contingent commanders and their per-
sonnel report to the Force Commander and they should not act on national 
direction, particularly if those actions might adversely affect implementa-
tion of the mission mandate or run contrary to United Nations policies 
applicable to the mission. Member States may withdraw their contributed 
personnel from the mission through advice to United Nations Headquarters. 
In integrated missions, the SRSG/HOM is a civilian who reports to the 
Secretary-General through the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping 
Operations at United Nations Headquarters.
2 Th e  S RS G / H O M  is  gi v en  
significant delegated authority to set the direction of the mission and to lead 
its engagement with the political process on the ground. The SRSG/HOM 
is responsible for coordinating the activities of the entire United Nations 
system in the field and is assisted in this task by the DSRSG/RC/HC, who 
is expected to serve as the principal interface with the UNCT.
The SRSG/HOM and his/her deputies form part of a Mission Leadership 
Team (MLT). The core membership of the MLT is comprised of the heads 
of the major functional components of the mission. The MLT is responsible 
for overseeing the implementation of the mission’s activities. In the absence 
of a standing “operational headquarters” structure, United Nations Head-
quarters and the mission headquarters must form a strong and collegial 
relationship to ensure that the mission can quickly and effectively leverage 
political support for its operations on the ground. The United Nations Head-
quarters personnel and the mission’s MLT need to play mutually supporting 
roles, both in developing a political strategy for the mission and in managing 
the operations and resources to support that strategy. 
7. 2 The Challenge of Mission Integration and Coordination
Integrated missions are designed to facilitate a coherent, system-wide  
approach to the United Nations engagement in countries emerging from 
conflict. The United Nations has the unique ability to employ a mix of civil-
ian, police and military capabilities, under a unified leadership to support 
a fragile peace process. At the same time, United Nations peacekeeping 
operations are almost always deployed alongside a variety of external actors, 
with widely differing mandates, agendas and time horizons. The challenge 
of managing an integrated mission is thus further compounded by the need 
to ensure that there is some degree of coordination between the United 
Nations and the range of non-United Nations actors who are often present 
in conflict and post-conflict settings.
In essence, an integrated mission is a strategic partnership between a multi-
dimensional United Nations peacekeeping operation and the UNCT, under 
the leadership of the SRSG and the DSRSG/RC/HC. The SRSG is the “the 
senior United Nations representative in the country” with “overall authority 
over all the activities of the United Nations” and is responsible for “ensur-
ing that all the United Nations components in the country pursue a coor -
dinated and coherent approach.”
3 The DSRSG/RC/HC is responsible for the 
coordination of both humanitarian operations and United Nations devel -
opment operations, and for maintaining links with governments and other 
parties, donors, and the broader humanitarian and development commu -
nities for this purpose.
4
70 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 7 | 71
Ultimately, successful integration and coordination requires a high degree of 
sensitivity to the interests and operating cultures of three broad sets of actors:
 Mission components
 UNCT members 
 External partners
Integration is more than just a matter of bureaucratic reporting lines. Figure 
6, below, presents a simplified view of what is, in fact, a highly complex oper-
ating environment. 
Integrating the mission’s components. The various components of a United 
Nations peacekeeping operation – civilian, police, military and support – 
come under the direct authority of the SRSG/Head of Mission (HOM) and 
the MLT. In large integrated missions, the MLT is normally supported by 
the following structures, which are designed to facilitate integration between 
the mission’s components: 
 A Joint Operations Centre (JOC) that collates situation reports and opera-
tional information from all mission sources to provide current situational 
awareness for the mission. The JOC also acts as a crisis coordination 
hub.
5
 A Joint Mission Analysis Centre (JMAC) that provides integrated analy-
sis of all-sources of information to assess medium- and long-term threats 
to the mandate and to support MLT decision-making.
 An Integrated Support Service (ISS) that harnesses all logistical resources 
of the mission.
 A Joint Logistics Operations Centre (JLOC) to coordinate the provision 
of logistical support, in accordance with MLT priorities.
Although the components of a United Nations peacekeeping operation have 
the same mandate, share a single budget, and depend on the same integrated 
support services, there are significant cultural differences, both national and 
professional, within and between them. Many civilian organizations and 
government departments routinely function with a high degree of tolerance 
for ambiguity and highly flexible management models. At the same time, 
military staff tend to seek to minimize ambiguity by making informed 
assumptions within a strong planning culture. Mission leaders and staff 
must seek to reconcile these differing “institutional cultures,” while being 
careful not to stifle the cultural diversity that constitutes one of the United 
Nations main strengths.
Integrating the United Nations effort. As discussed in Chapter 5, integrated 
planning allows the United Nations system to maximize the impact of its 
engagement in countries emerging from conflict by ensuring that its activi-
ties are guided by a common strategic vision. However, integration does 
not mean that all United Nations actors on the ground should be physically 
integrated or subsumed under a single structure. Moreover, while the mem-
bers of the UNCT come under the overall authority of the SRSG/HOM, in 
reality, they are governed by mandates, decision-making structures and 
funding arrangements that are quite distinct from those of the United Nations 
peacekeeping operation. As a result, integration among the members of the 
broader United Nations family cannot simply be imposed by edict from above, 
and can only be achieved through a constant process of dialogue and nego-
tiation between the actors concerned. 
EXTERNAL PARTNERS
UN COUNTRY TEAM
MISSION COMPONENTS
Figure 6 The Challenge of Mission Integration
72 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 7 | 73
There is no “one-size-fits-all approach” to achieving integration among 
United Nations actors in the field. There is a range of implementation mo-
dalities through which an integrated mission may pursue common United 
Nations objectives in its mandated areas of activity. In some areas, for exam-
ple, human rights or electoral assistance are fully integrated into the mission’s 
activities, and the relevant components of the United Nations peacekeeping 
operation are usually staffed by personnel drawn from the lead department 
or agency concerned. Others, such as DDR, see a looser arrangement driven 
by joint planning and conduct of programmes by different actors. Alterna-
tively, the delivery of humanitarian assistance is conducted by humanitarian 
agencies, as a parallel activity, under the coordination of the DSRSG/RC/
HC.
6 The United Nations system should decide at the country-level which 
implementation modalities are best suited to the achievement of its com -
mon objectives. To this end, individual United Nations actors may need to 
revise their respective country programmes, annual work plans, and other 
frameworks to reflect the new plans that have been developed.
Ultimately, it is the responsibility of the SRSG/HOM, supported by the 
DSRSG/RC/HC and the other members of the MLT, to define the United 
Nations system’s strategic priorities at the country-level and to ensure that 
the activities of all United Nations actors contribute to the achievement of 
the mission’s strategic objectives. The SRSG/HOM must always consider 
the views and concerns of the various constituencies within the mission in 
order to ensure that, to the extent possible, activities undertaken in one area 
do not undermine other aspects of the mandate. Senior mission leaders 
and staff must ensure that any friction remains manageable and that the 
United Nations family remains in control of the dynamic, in order to ensure 
that others do not exploit the differences between United Nations actors. 
This entails a respect for the diversity of approaches being pursued in a post-
conflict context and the need for international strategies to evolve over time 
along with the peace process.
Coordination with external partners. The large number of international 
and national actors implementing activities in post-conflict environments 
precludes the development of one common plan or strategy, much less one 
common structure or programme. Nevertheless, it is incumbent upon the 
peacekeeping operation to meet regularly and share information with all 
actors, and to harmonize activities, to the extent possible, by seeking their 
input into the mission’s planning process and to respond actively and sub-
stantively to requests for cooperation. Examples of such actors include:
 Bilateral and multilateral donors, including the World Bank and the Inter-
national Monetary Fund (IMF), as well as NGOs or contractors working 
for donors; 
 Non-United Nations led military formations deployed nationally, under 
the aegis of a regional organization or as part of an ad hoc coalition; 
 The diplomatic corps and other regional or international political actors; 
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and other com -
ponents of the International Movement, as well as other independent 
humanitarian actors, such as humanitarian NGOs.
These actors normally pursue independent agendas, which may or may not 
coincide with the strategic priorities identified by the peacekeeping opera-
tion. Some may be operating according to widely different timelines and 
work methods, or they may simply not be capable of engaging in intensive 
cooperation due to the periodic nature of their engagement in the country. 
In these circumstances, proactive sharing of information by the mission is 
still important, even if the intensity of cooperation is limited.
Humanitarian actors, such as the ICRC, have as an institutional imperative 
to maintain a high level of visible independence from political-military 
structures to ensure the safety and feasibility of their actions and personnel. 
United Nations peacekeepers must be cognizant of the concept of “humani-
tarian space,” which can be understood as the space created through respect 
for the humanitarian principles of independence and neutrality. It is in this 
space that humanitarian action takes place. As such, a clear distinction must 
be made between politically motivated actions to end conflict and move
74 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 8 | 75
toward national development, and apolitical humanitarian assistance based 
exclusively on impartial response to assessed need, aimed at saving lives, 
alleviating suffering and maintaining or restoring the dignity of people 
affected by conflict. Maintaining this distinction better assures humanitar-
ian agencies safe and secure access throughout a conflict zone.
It is incumbent upon the peacekeeping operation to regularly meet and 
share information with all actors and, to the extent possible, harmonize 
activities by seeking their input into the mission’s planning process. This 
includes the sharing of non-operationally sensitive geospatial data. The mis-
sion may also be requested to assist with large-scale humanitarian responses 
in extremis . For this eventuality, the MLT, through the DSRSG/HC/RC, 
should seek to establish effective information sharing and coordination mech-
anisms to ensure maximum coherence and to prevent any adverse impact on 
humanitarian and development operations. Due to the high turnover of some 
mission personnel, coordination arrangements and induction programmes 
should be designed to minimize the burden on partner organizations. 
8.1 United Nations Logistics and Administration
As discussed in Chapter 2, United Nations peacekeeping operations have 
evolved to encompass a wide range of mandated tasks. The administrative, 
logistical and other specialized support arrangements for United Nations 
peacekeeping operations are crucial for the effective implementation of 
these tasks. The relationship between the military, police, substantive civil-
ian and support components of a United Nations peacekeeping operation is, 
therefore, of crucial importance. 
At the United Nations Headquarters level, DFS is responsible for delivering 
dedicated support to United Nations field operations, including personnel, 
finance, field procurement, logistical, communications, information tech -
nology, and other administrative and general management issues. In the 
field, the support component of a United Nations peacekeeping operation 
provides administrative and logistic support services that enable the mis -
sion to carry out its core functions in an effective, coordinated and timely 
manner, consistent with the regulations and procedures prescribed by the 
United Nations. 
Mission assets are distributed to all mission components on an equitable 
basis, depending on functional need and assessed priorities. Delivering 
common support services is part of the administrative functions of a United 
Nations peacekeeping operation and falls under the responsibility of the  
Supporting and Sustaining United Nations 
Peacekeeping Operations
Chapter 8
76 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 8 | 77
Director of Mission Support (DMS) or Chief of Mission Support (CMS). 
The DMS/CMS reports directly to the SRSG/HOM. The DMS/CMS has 
up-to-date information on the status of all resources available within the 
mission, and direct access to all available means of acquiring items.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are often deployed in environments 
which are both volatile and unpredictable, and where host nation infrastruc-
ture is minimal or severely degraded. Within this challenging operating 
environment, United Nations peacekeeping operations undertake a broad 
spectrum of civilian and military tasks, which may need to be sustained over 
several years. Moreover, an operation may be required to switch to a more 
robust posture and back again at various points in a mission’s lifecycle and 
may need to switch the emphasis of operations between different compo -
nents of the mission, for example, to support a DDR programme, an election 
or a security operation.
A mission support element which is flexible enough to adapt quickly to 
changing circumstances on the ground allows for greater internal capacity 
to respond to the mission’s substantive operations. This requires good logis-
tic planning, communication and resourcing, and close integration between 
the uniformed and support components of a mission. Most of all, it requires 
strong integrated planning and priority-setting among the mission’s leader-
ship team. It also requires flexibility in the management of mission assets by 
the mission’s support element.
The logistic and administrative support for United Nations operations is 
more complex than many other logistical support models. This complexity 
is due to the requirement to support contingents deploying with widely 
varying levels of self-sufficiency, and the differing requirements between 
military contingents, civilian staff, police and military observers. United 
Nations operations are also subject to financial accountability procedures 
which do not align operational responsibility with budgetary accountability. 
Accordingly, the system of United Nations logistics is not well-designed to 
support high-tempo, short-notice military operations. This helps define a point 
beyond which a United Nations peacekeeping operation is not able to escalate. 
United Nations peacekeeping operations function through a mix of civilian 
contracted services procured by the United Nations and military support 
capabilities, provided through ‘lease’ arrangements between the United 
Nations and contributing Member States.
7 When formed military units are 
deployed to a mission, the logistic support concept is based on the integra-
tion of United Nations-provided and contingent-provided resources to 
support all components of the mission. All of a mission’s support resources 
are managed jointly through an integrated civilian and military logistics 
support service and a common administrative system throughout all United 
Nations missions.
The consolidation and integration function of integrated support services 
is focused in a JLOC, which is staffed by military and civilian logistics 
personnel and coordinates the logistical needs of all mission components. 
The JLOC often becomes a focal point for cooperation and mutual assistance 
on logistical issues between the United Nations peacekeeping operations, 
other agencies and NGOs.
Mission support elements must comply with strict rules and regulations 
and are sometimes criticized for not being responsive enough to operational 
requirements, especially during crises. Financial accountability controls for 
United Nations peacekeeping are essential, and demanded by the Member 
States. Yet, for the system to work effectively in support of the mission leader-
ship, they need to be balanced with operational principles of flexibility and 
responsiveness, and administered with a view to effective risk management.
8.2 Human Resource Management 
Attracting and retaining qualified personnel is a critical support function 
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. As stated in Article 101 of the 
Charter, securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integ-
rity is the paramount consideration in the employment of United Nations 
staff and the determination of conditions of service. The international and 
national staff and uniformed personnel of a United Nations peacekeeping
78 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 8 | 79
operation are its most valuable assets and must be managed carefully. Being 
a United Nations peacekeeper requires extraordinary professionalism, dedi-
cation and self-restraint. The vast majority of the women and men serving 
in United Nations peacekeeping operations around the world do, indeed, 
possess these rare qualities. Yet, recent experience has shown that the actions 
of a minority who do not possess such qualities can result in irreparable 
damage to the reputation of the mission and the United Nations, as a whole. 
Given the difficult environments in which many United Nations peacekeeping 
operations are deployed, turn-over rates for international personnel can be 
high. The conditions of service in many United Nations peacekeeping opera-
tions make it extremely difficult to attract qualified and experienced person-
nel. In the field, the provision of adequate welfare arrangements for both 
uniformed and civilian personnel is not only crucial for maintaining morale, 
but is also a key tool for preventing the instances of gross misconduct that 
have marred the United Nations peacekeeping record. Missions should make 
an effort to establish welfare committees and provide recreational facilities 
for peacekeeping personnel, within their existing resources. In particular, 
the civilian and military leadership within the mission must make an effort 
to ensure that funds allocated by TCCs/PCCs for the welfare of uniformed 
personnel actually reach their intended beneficiaries and that the welfare 
needs of civilian staff, which are often neglected, are also addressed.
Individual personalities are a major factor in any United Nations peacekeep-
ing operation. Even when the necessary coordination mechanisms and 
processes are in place, it is vital to ensure that key positions are filled by 
the right individuals with the right skill-sets. Ultimately, it is the example 
and guidance provided by the senior leadership of a United Nations peace-
keeping operation that will unite the components and ensure that the United 
Nations system is working as a team.
The selection of senior mission leaders must be a carefully considered pro-
cess. Mutual respect and the ability to transcend “turf” issues are essential 
qualities for the successful management and integration of multi-dimensional 
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Education and training are vital 
to ensuring that the appointment of senior mission leaders is not a “lottery.” 
Prior to assuming their functions, senior mission leaders should be given 
adequate training and preparation on the challenges that they are likely to 
face in the field. All personnel in leadership positions should exemplify the 
highest standards and should be held accountable for their behaviour and 
performance. If not performing up to expectations, they should be counselled 
and, if necessary, removed from the mission. 
8.3 Security of Personnel
The primary responsibility for the security and protection of United Nations 
peacekeeping personnel and assets rests with the host government. This 
responsibility flows from the government’s inherent function of maintain-
ing law and order, protecting persons and property within its jurisdiction, 
as well as from the special responsibility enshrined in the Charter.
8
The Designated Official (DO), usually the senior-most United Nations offi-
cial in a country, is responsible for the security of United Nations staff. When 
appointed DO, the SRSG/HOM is accountable to the Secretary-General 
(through the Under-Secretary-General for Safety and Security) for the secu-
rity of all civilian personnel employed by the organizations of the United 
Nations system and their recognized departments throughout the country 
or designated area. The DO is supported by the Chief Security Adviser (CSA), 
Department of Safety and Security (DSS), and the Security Management 
Team (SMT) which oversees United Nations security arrangements in coun-
try. The SMT’s composition and standing operating procedures are articu-
lated in the DSS Field Security Handbook.
While the safety and security of staff and facilities is largely situation specific, 
some key standards have been developed, such as the Minimum Operating 
Security Standards (MOSS). These standards are established, implemented 
and monitored at the direction of the CSA and the DO. These standards apply
80 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 9 | 81
to both international and national staff. While uniformed personnel do 
not fall under the United Nations security management system, the heads 
of the military and police component should work closely with the CSA to 
ensure that the best possible security arrangements are put in place for all 
personnel. To this end, the respective heads of component will determine 
the best balance between operational necessity and the security of uniformed 
personnel. The heads of the military and police components are account -
able to the HoM for the security of uniformed personnel. 
9.1 Managing Mission Impact
United Nations peacekeeping operations must be aware of and proactively 
manage their impact, both real and perceived, in the host country and 
community. United Nations peacekeeping operations are highly visible and 
generate high expectations. Accordingly, United Nations peacekeeping per-
sonnel should be careful to mitigate the possible negative consequences of 
the mission’s presence. United Nations peacekeeping personnel must adhere 
to national laws, where these do not violate fundamental human rights 
standards, respect local culture, and maintain the highest standards of per-
sonal and professional conduct.
Personnel serving in United Nations peacekeeping operations should be 
alert to any potential, unforeseen or damaging consequences of their actions 
and manage these as quickly and effectively as possible. Poor driving and 
vehicle accidents and lax waste management practices are just some of the 
negative impacts that may seriously undermine the perceived legitimacy 
and credibility of a mission, and erode its popular support. The size of a 
United Nations peacekeeping operation’s human and material footprint is 
likely to have a direct bearing on its impact, or perceived impact, in the 
community. Missions should be aware of the possible side-effects they may 
generate, including:
 Social impact (for example, in the conduct and behavior of staff);
Maintaining Support for the Mission
Chapter 9
82 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 9 | 83
 Economic impact (for example, on housing and staple foods and materials);
 Environmental impact (for example, waste management or water usage).
Social impacts such as different cultural norms of mission staff and host 
country customs may create friction (e.g.: employment of women in non-
traditional gender roles, mixing and socialization amongst genders, drink-
ing, gambling, inappropriate behaviour, etc.). United Nations peacekeeping 
operations also have a major impact on the host economy, by pushing up 
the price of local housing and accommodation, or placing demands on local 
producers for staple foods and materials, placing such items out of reach of 
the local community. All of these have the potential for creating friction 
and discontent within the local population and they should be continuously 
monitored and managed by the mission’s leadership.
In assessing mission impact and devising strategies to address it, the mis -
sion should be careful to ensure that the differential impacts on men and 
women, as well as children and vulnerable groups, are considered. Although 
no mission can control all of the side-effects of its presence, it must under-
take due diligence in managing its own impact. Where problems do arise, 
they should be addressed swiftly and honestly. At the same time, rumors 
and vexatious or erroneous accusations against the mission must be coun-
tered with vigor to maintain the good reputation of the international presence.
9.2 Communications and Outreach
Effective public information is a political and operational necessity. Its over-
all objective in United Nations peacekeeping operations is to enhance the 
ability of the mission to carry out its mandate successfully. Key strategic goals 
are to maintain the cooperation of the parties to the peace process, manage 
expectations and garner support for the operation among the local popula-
tion, and secure broad international support, especially among TCCs/PCCs 
and major donors. Public information should be thoroughly integrated into 
a United Nations peacekeeping operation at all stages of planning and de-
ployment. The mission’s Chief of Public Information should be a key actor 
in the senior leadership’s decision-making process.
From the moment a peacekeeping operation is authorized, the United Nations 
must be able to ensure that the mandate and objectives of the mission are 
fully understood by the host population and other key actors. Consideration 
of the role that public information will play in the future peacekeeping 
operation, as well as the structures and resources that will be required to 
support that role, must begin at the earliest possible stage. A public informa-
tion assessment gauging the most effective ways of reaching the population 
should, thus, be conducted prior to the launch of any field mission.
Effective communications and outreach will enhance the mission’s ability 
to achieve its mandate and contribute to the security of mission personnel. 
A well designed and skilfully implemented communications strategy will 
increase confidence in the peace process, build trust among parties to a 
conflict, and generate support for national reconciliation. It will establish 
the mission as a trusted source of information and help counter the nega -
tive effects of irresponsible, hostile and controlled media. If the parameters 
of United Nations activity are clearly laid out and explained to the local 
population and other target audiences, fear and misunderstanding will be 
minimized, disinformation will be corrected, and the impact of those who 
wish to damage the peace process through rumour and untruth will be 
minimized. In addition, mission public information activities should be 
geared towards helping establish an environment that promotes the devel-
opment of free and independent media, and the adherence to the highest 
journalistic ethics and standards.
The mission’s public information campaign provides an opportunity to 
reach out to key groups within society, whose voices may not otherwise be 
heard, and to promote consensus around the peace process. Use should be 
made of local public radio and television, if available, as well as traditional
84 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 10 | 85
forms of public information dissemination, such as the local community 
and religious groups. Where no local dissemination capacity exists, a United 
Nations capability should be deployed at the earliest stages, while helping 
concurrently to build local capacities. 
10.1 Partnerships and Transition Planning
No single organization can presently conduct all of the multifaceted tasks 
required to support and consolidate peace processes. Partnerships are thus 
indispensable to the success of the international community’s efforts in post-
conflict settings. Chapter 5 and 7 have provided guidance on how to man-
age the relationship with partners in the planning and conduct of ongoing 
operations. This chapter focuses on two important aspects of partnership: 
the transition from other security actors to a United Nations peacekeeping 
operation; and the hand-over of responsibilities from a United Nations peace-
keeping operation to United Nations system partners and others, as it pre-
pares to withdraw.
The United Nations is no longer the only actor conducting peace operations. 
The number of peace operations mounted by non-United Nations actors has 
doubled in the past decade. The African Union (AU), the Economic Com -
munity of West African States (ECOWAS), the European Union (EU), the 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Common-
wealth of Independent States (CIS) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organi-
zation (NATO) have all mounted major operations of their own (in most cases 
with the authorization of the United Nations Security Council); and they 
are making concerted efforts to increase their capacities in this area.
The growing involvement of regional agencies and arrangements in the main-
tenance of international peace and security, as envisaged in Chapter VIII 
Transition and Exit
Chapter 10
86 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 10 | 87
of the Charter, has created new opportunities for combining the capabili -
ties of United Nations and non-United Nations actors to manage complex 
crises. In several instances, troops and police deployed as part of a regional 
organization-led peace operation have been “re-hatted” upon the deployment 
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation. In some cases, United Nations 
peacekeeping operations consisting only of civilian and/or police person-
nel have been deployed alongside forces under the command of a regional 
organization. The Security Council has also authorized the deployment of a 
“hybrid” peacekeeping operation, in which elements from the United Nations 
and a regional organization are deployed as part of the same mission under 
joint leadership. Although cooperation between the United Nations and re-
gional organizations in the area of peace and security has tended to occur 
on an ad hoc basis and is often dictated by political expediency, new more 
systematic partnerships are emerging.
9
In circumstances where a United Nations peacekeeping operation is required 
to assume responsibility from a non-United Nations led peace operation, an 
effort should be made to develop a mutually agreed joint transition plan 
outlining the modalities, steps and timeframe for achieving transition and 
the assumption of United Nations responsibility. In addition to detailing 
when and how responsibilities will be transferred, such a plan should spell 
out any implications for the UNCT and other partners, in order to ensure 
consistency of approach and timing with the overall mission planning pro-
cess. Emphasis should be placed on security and how to ensure maximum 
stability at a moment of potential weakness, including as a result of any mis-
match in capabilities and tasks.
10.2 Hand-Over and Withdrawal
The United Nations engagement in a country which is emerging from con-
flict rarely begins with the deployment of a peacekeeping operation and is 
likely to continue long after its withdrawal. In most cases, the UNCT will 
have been on the ground long before the deployment of a United Nations 
peacekeeping operation and will be responsible for supporting the process 
of long-term recovery once the peacekeeping operation has withdrawn. In 
some instances, a United Nations peacekeeping operation may be preceded 
by or deployed alongside a United Nations special political mission or peace-
building support office. Some United Nations peacekeeping operations have 
also been succeeded by integrated offices, headed by an Executive Represent-
ative of the Secretary-General (ERSG).
10
Ultimately, it is the prerogative of the Security Council to decide whether 
a United Nations peacekeeping operation should hand-over responsibility 
to another United Nations body or non-United Nations entity, and withdraw. 
Nevertheless, the Secretariat and the United Nations peacekeeping opera-
tion have a responsibility to ensure that the Security Council’s decision is 
based on an honest assessment of real progress made towards the achieve-
ment of a sustainable peace.
As discussed in Chapter 2, traditional United Nations peacekeeping opera-
tions are deployed as an interim measure to help manage a conflict and 
create conditions in which the negotiation of a lasting settlement can pro -
ceed. A traditional United Nations peacekeeping operation can be said to 
have successfully completed its mandate once the states concerned have 
arrived at a mutually agreed settlement to their conflict. Since they have 
little direct involvement in diplomatic efforts to resolve the conflict, some 
traditional peacekeeping operations are deployed for decades, due to the 
absence of a lasting political settlement between the parties.
Determining whether a multi-dimensional United Nations peacekeeping 
deployed in the aftermath of a violent internal conflict has successfully 
completed its mandate is far more challenging given the number of com -
plex variables involved. Experience has shown that a domestic peace is 
truly sustainable when the warring parties are able to move their struggles 
from the battlefield and into an institutional framework where disputes 
can be settled peacefully. The deployment of troops and police must be 
accompanied by efforts to restore the State’s monopoly over the legitimate
88 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III CHAPTER 10 | 89
use of force; re-establish the rule of law and strengthen respect for human 
rights; foster the emergence of legitimate and effective institutions of gov-
ernance; and promote socio-economic recovery. The decision to shift the 
focus of the United Nations engagement from stabilization to longer-term 
peacebuilding must, therefore, take into account the degree of progress made 
in each of these critical areas.
The transition from a United Nations peacekeeping operation to subsequent 
phases of United Nations engagement should be factored into the planning 
process from the outset, with a view to clearly delineating the roles and 
responsibilities of the various United Nations actors on the ground. Reli -
able benchmarks and indicators are required to determine when the United 
Nations peacekeeping operation can begin the process of hand-over and 
withdrawal, without jeopardizing ongoing efforts to consolidate the peace. 
There is no standard “check-list” of benchmarks applicable to all situations. 
The specific benchmarks used will differ from situation to situation, depend-
ing on the underlying causes of the conflict and the dynamics at play. They 
must be developed in close collaboration with the rest of the United Nations 
system, the national authorities, civil society, and other relevant stakehold-
ers, taking into account the United Nations longer-term strategic goals.
Care must be taken to identify appropriate benchmarks that reflect real 
progress towards the consolidation of peace in the country. Indicators should 
not simply be measurements of international community inputs to a peace 
process, which may present an incomplete picture. Examples of key bench-
marks that may be used to determine at which point the process of peace 
consolidation is sufficiently advanced to allow for the hand-over of certain 
mission responsibilities include the following:
 The absence of violent conflict and large-scale human rights abuses, and 
respect for women’s and minority rights; 
 Completion of the DDR of former combatants (male and female, adults 
and children) and progress in restoring or establishing responsible state 
institutions for security;
 The ability of the national armed forces and the national police to pro -
vide security and maintain public order with civilian oversight and 
respect for human rights; 
 Progress towards the establishment of an independent and effective judi-
ciary and corrections system;
 The restoration of State authority and the resumption of basic services 
throughout the country; 
 The return or resettlement and reintegration of displaced persons with min-
imal internal disruption or conflict in the areas of return or resettlement;
 The successful formation of legitimate political institutions following the 
holding of free and fair elections where women and men have equal rights 
to vote and seek political office.
Wherever possible, benchmarks should be established through dialogue 
with national interlocutors. The mission should seek multiple sources of 
validation regarding this progress and should not shy away from reporting 
on a deteriorating situation. In this respect, United Nations peacekeeping 
operations should resist the temptation to report overly optimistic assess -
ments of progress against key benchmarks.
Depending on the evolving situation, it may be appropriate for the bench-
marks to be amended over time. Whatever the benchmarks adopted, they 
should be regarded as interim objectives in the broader effort to build a 
self-sustaining peace, the realization of which will allow the international 
community to progressively shift the focus of its post-conflict assistance from 
stabilization to long-term peacebuilding and economic recovery.
The withdrawal of a United Nations peacekeeping operation should be 
planned and conducted in close consultation with all relevant partners 
and national stakeholders, to ensure minimal disruption of international 
programmes as a result of the mission’s departure, and to minimize the 
impact on the host population and environment. As a final contribution to 
the institutional learning process, it is important that an effort be made to
90 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS PART III ENDNOTES | 91
capture any remaining lessons learned at the end of the mission by con -
ducting of After Action Reviews (AARs) and/or End of Assignment Reports 
(EoARs)11 that may benefit those responsible for the planning and conduct 
of future United Nations peacekeeping operations. 
1 See DPKO Policy Directive on Authority, Command and Control for United Nations Multi-dimensional 
Peacekeeping Operations ( 2007).
2 For missions of a military nature, the Secretary-General may appoint a Force Commander or Chief 
Military Observer as Head of Mission.
3 Note of Guidance on Integrated Missions, Clarifying the Role, Responsibility and Authority of the Spe-
cial Representative of the Secretary-General and the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General/Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordination, 9 December 2005 , para. 5.
4 Ibid., para. 18–19.
5 See DPKO Policy Directive on JOCs and JMACs, 1 July 2006. In this context, the term “joint” refers 
to the internal collaboration required between all mission components to achieve shared objectives 
under a single leadership team.
6 Where the DSRSG/RC/HC is supported by an office of the United Nations Office of the Coordination 
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), OCHA will normally serve as the humanitarian coordination 
office. Where appropriate, the OCHA office may remain outside the mission structure to facilitate 
access by the broader humanitarian community. 
7 Generally, contingents arrive with between 30–90 days of supplies to maintain self-sufficiency.  
During that period, the United Nations enters into service contracts to provide the bulk supplies of 
a mission, such as water, rations, laundry, waste disposal and some transport services. Contingents 
bringing their own equipment are paid for the lease of this equipment by the United Nations, based 
on agreed reimbursement rates.
8 Under Article 105 of the Charter, the United Nations is entitled to enjoy such privileges and immuni-
ties as are necessary for the fulfilment of its purposes. Additional diplomatic privileges are accorded 
to United Nations staff members and premises in times of international crisis, by the 1946 Conven-
tion on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations and the Specialised Agencies and, 
more explicitly, by the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated personnel, 
which obligates all signatories to ensure the safety and security of United Nations and associated 
personnel deployed in their territory. 
9 The “Joint Declaration on EU-UN Co-operation in Crisis Management” was signed in September 2003.
10 Integrated offices consist of the members of the UNCT and may be augmented by the presence of 
military and police specialists. 
11 After Action Reviews (AARs) and End of Assignment Reports (EoARs) are tools developed by DPKO 
to facilitate the capturing and sharing of lessons learned from the field. 
Endnotes
United Nations Peacekeeping  
Doctrine Framework
Annex 1
As shown in the diagram below, the United Nations peacekeeping doctrine 
framework is currently divided into six major guidance “series” (1000–6000), 
which provide basic reference codes for the organization and management 
of internal DPKO/DFS policy and guidance materials. Each series is further 
subdivided into specific thematic and/or functional areas.
DPKO/DFS Policy and Guidance Index 
1000-Series: Capstone Doctrine
The 1000-series covers the basic principles and key concepts underpinning the planning and conduct of 
contemporary United Nations peacekeeping operations as well as their core functions and the main fac -
tors affecting their success. United Nations Peacekeeping Operations: Principles and Guidelines sits at the highest 
level in the 1000-series. 1000-series guidance also includes the Handbook on United Nations Multi-dimensional 
Peacekeeping Operations. All subordinate guidance must be consistent with the principles and concepts set 
out in the 1000 -series.  
2000-Series: Headquarters Support to Operations
The 2000-series contains guidance on DPKO/DFS headquarters roles, responsibilities and functions in 
support of field missions. Specific areas covered in the 2000-series include: command and control and 
executive direction; mission planning and budgeting; recruitment and force generation; deployment and 
mission start-up; political analysis and briefings; and reporting, monitoring and operations management.  
3000-Series: Management and Integration of Operations
The 3000-series covers the management and integration of United Nations peacekeeping operations in 
the field. Documents in this series are intended to provide guidance on arrangements for the effective 
planning, management and integration of operational and support capabilities in the mission. The 3000- 
series also contains guidance on the effective execution of managerial responsibilities related to the safety, 
integrity and oversight of the mission and its resources. Specific areas covered in the 3000-series include: 
mission command and control; political analysis and diplomatic activity; mission planning; safety and 
security; crisis management; and conduct welfare and discipline. 
4000-Series: Multi-dimensional Operations 
The 4000-series contains guidance on the employment of military, police and substantive civilian capa -
bilities within a United Nations peacekeeping operation. The use of guidance in this series will vary depend-
ing on the deployed mission capabilities, and should be seen as modular. Guidance in the 4000-series 
also draws on and must be consistent with the principles and concepts set out in the 1000-series. Specific 
areas covered in the 4000-series include: political and civil affairs; military; law enforcement (police); 
legal and judicial; corrections/prisons; human rights; DDR; SSR; mine action; and elections.  
5000-Series: Field Operations Support
The 5000-series contains guidance on the integration and employment of all support resources in a mission 
with the aim of providing timely, efficient and effective support to meet mandate priorities. Guidance on 
mission support capabilities should be consistent with and should directly support the operational and 
managerial requirements identified in the 3000- and 4000-series. Specific areas covered in the 5000-series 
include: logistics support; movement control; strategic deployment stocks; aviation; surface transport; 
engineering; communications and information technology; medical; finance; and procurement and con -
tract management. 
6000 -Series: Headquarters Management and Administration
The 6000-series sets out the managerial and administrative procedures governing the functioning of 
DPKO and DFS as specialized, field-focused, operational arms of the United Nations Secretariat. Specific 
areas covered in the 6000-series include: planning, budget and oversight; human resources and travel; 
and writing and records. 
1000-Series:  
Capstone Doctrine
2000-Series: Headquarters  
Support to Operations
3000-Series: Management and  
Integration of Operations
5000-Series:  
Field Operations Support
4000-Series:  
Multi-dimensional Operations 
6000-Series: Headquarters Management  
and Administration
HQ
(    )
UN
92 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS ANNEX 1 | 93
AU African Union
CAAC Children and Armed Conflict
CAP Consolidated Appeals Process 
Cease-fire A temporary stoppage of war, which may also be undertaken as 
part of a larger negotiated settlement. A cease-fire marking the permanent 
end of war is referred to as an armistice. 
CIS Commonwealth of Independent States
CMS Chief of Mission Support
CIMIC Civil-Military Cooperation
Conflict Prevention Any structural or diplomatic measures to keep intra-state 
or inter-state tensions and disputes from escalating into violent conflict. 
Contingency Plan  A management tool used to ensure adequate arrange -
ments are made in anticipation of a crisis. 
Designated Official  The senior-most United Nations decision-maker on 
safety and security issues, in a given country.
DFS Department of Field Support 
DMS Director of Mission Support
Doctrine The evolving body of institutional guidance that provides support 
and direction to personnel preparing for, planning and implementing UN 
peacekeeping operations. 
DDR Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration 
DSRSG Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General. 
DSRSG/RC/HC Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General/
Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator 
DSS Department of Safety and Security 
ECOWAS Economic Community of West African States
EU European Union
FC Force Commander
Good Offices The authority and legitimacy afforded by one’s moral stature 
or gained through one’s position or function that allows one to perform ben-
eficial acts for another. This authority and legitimacy allows individuals to 
act as third-party mediators in various types of disputes. 
HC Humanitarian Coordinator
HOM Head of Mission 
HOMC Head of Military Component
HOPC Head of Police Component
Humanitarian Assistance  Material or logistical assistance provided for 
human itarian purposes, typically in response to humanitarian crises. The 
primary objective of humanitarian assistance is to save lives, alleviate suf-
fering and maintain human dignity.
Selected Glossary of Acronyms and Terms*
Annex 2
94 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS ANNEX 2 | 95
Humanitarian Space This means the ability of humanitarian agencies to 
work independently and impartially, without fear of attack in pursuit of the 
humanitarian imperative.
Hybrid Operation A peace operation involving the deployment of military, 
police or civilian personnel from two or more entities under a single structure. 
ICRC International Committee of the Red Cross
IFI International Financial Institution is a generic term referring to the World 
Bank, IMF and other international or regional development banks.
IMF International Monetary Fund
IMPP Integrated Mission Planning Process
Integration The process through which the United Nations system seeks 
to maximize its contribution towards countries emerging from conflict by 
engaging its different capabilities in a coherent and mutually supportive 
manner. 
Integrated Mission A strategic partnership between a multi-dimensional 
United Nations peacekeeping operation and the UNCT based on a shared 
vision among all United Nations actors as to the strategic objectives of the 
United Nations presence at country-level. 
IPBS Integrated Peacebuilding Strategy
ISS Integrated Support Services
JLOC Joint Logistics Operations Centre 
JOC Joint Operations Centre
JMAC Joint Mission Analysis Cell 
Multi-dimensional United Nations Peacekeeping Operations United Nations 
peacekeeping operations comprising a mix of military, police and civilian 
components working together to lay the foundations of a sustainable peace. 
MOU Memorandum of Understanding
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NGO Non-governmental Organization
OCHA Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
OHCHR Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
OSCE Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Parties Persons or entities involved in a dispute.
PCC Police Contributing Country
Peace Agreement A formal treaty intended to end or significantly transform 
violent conflict. 
Peacebuilding Measures aimed at reducing the risk of lapsing or relapsing 
into conflict, by strengthening national capacities for conflict management, 
and laying the foundations for sustainable peace.
Peace Enforcement Coercive action undertaken with the authorization of 
the United Nations Security Council to maintain or restore international 
peace and security in situations where the Security Council has determined 
the existence of a threat to the peace, breach of the peace or act of aggression.
Peacekeeping Action undertaken to preserve peace, however fragile, where 
fighting has been halted and to assist in implementing agreements achieved 
by the peacemakers.
96 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS ANNEX 2 | 97
Preventive Diplomacy Diplomatic efforts to avert disputes arising between 
parties from escalating into conflict.
Peacemaking Action to bring hostile parties to agreement. 
Peace Operations Field operations deployed to prevent, manage, and/or 
resolve violent conflicts or reduce the risk of their recurrence. 
PRSP Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers
QIPs Quick Impact Projects 
RC Resident Coordinator
Robust Peacekeeping The use of force by a United Nations peacekeeping 
operation at the tactical level, with the authorization of the Security Council, 
to defend its mandate against spoilers whose activities pose a threat to civil-
ians or risk undermining the peace process. 
ROE Rules of Engagement
Rule of Law A principle of governance in which all persons, institutions 
and entities, public and private, including the State itself, are accountable 
to laws that are publicly promulgated, equally enforced and independently 
adjudicated, and which are consistent with international human rights norms 
and standards. 
SDS Strategic Deployment Stocks
SLT Senior Leadership Team 
SMT Security Management Team 
SOFA/SOMA Status of Forces Agreement/Status of Mission Agreement 
Spoilers Individuals or groups that may profit from the spread or continu-
ation  of violence, or have an interest to disrupt a resolution of a conflict in 
a given setting. 
SRSG Special Representative of the Secretary-General
SSR Security Sector Reform
TAM Technical Assessment Mission
Traditional United Nations Peacekeeping Operations United Nations peace-
keeping operations conducted with the consent of the parties to a conflict, 
usually States, in which “Blue Helmets” monitor a truce between warring 
sides while mediators seek a political solution to the underlying conflict. 
Transition The hand-over of responsibilities between a non-United Nations 
led peace operation to a United Nations peacekeeping operation; or from the 
latter to other United Nations or non-United Nations actors upon the suc-
cessful completion of its mandate. 
Transitional Administration  A transitional authority established by the 
Security Council to assist a country during a government regime change or 
passage to independence. 
TRM Transitional Results Matrix
TCC Troop Contributing Country
UNCT United Nations Country Team
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
United Nations-Led Peace Operation A Peace operation authorized by the 
United Nations Security Council and conducted under the direction of the 
United Nations Secretary-General.
98 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS ANNEX 2 | 99
* The list does not provide authoritative United Nations definitions. It is intended to assist with under -
standing the usage of terms in this document only. Official United Nations definitions are being considered 
in the context of the ongoing terminology deliberations of the General Assembly’s Special Committee on 
Peacekeeping Operations on the basis of the DPKO Interim Glossary of Terms. 
100 | UNITED NATIONS PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS