United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 
 
Highlights 
 Following the 24 June earthquakes of magnitude 7.2 and 7.5 (18:00 local 
time), authorities report more than 1,200 aftershocks. 
 Official toll: 4,734 people dead and 16,740 injured. 
 A total of 6,462 people have been rescued. 
 An additional appeal for US$298  million was launched to scale up the 
earthquake response and address the multisectoral needs of 1.3 million 
people over the next six months. 
 The United Nations system and its partner organizations, in coordination with 
the Government, are responding with multisectoral actions and will continue 
to scale up assistance to affected people. 
 
Situation overview 
Venezuela is facing a national 
emergency following two consecutive 
high-magnitude earthquakes (7.2 and 
7.5) that struck on 24 June (18:00 local 
time) in the north- central region, with 
the epicentre located along the San 
Felipe–Yumare–Montalbán axis 
(Yaracuy/Carabobo). Authorities 
report 1,275 aftershocks. 
 
Twenty days since the earthquakes , 
authorities report a toll of 4,734 people 
dead, 16,740 injured and 6,462 
rescued since the onset  of the 
emergency. Authorities also indicated 
that 17,907 people lost their home.  
 
The Government response remains focused on search operations, the management of transitional camps 
and assistance to affected populations. The United Nations and its partner organizations, in coordination 
with the authorities, continue implementing multisectoral response activities and scaling up assistance. 
United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator Tom 
Fletcher announced a US$298 million addendum to the Humanitarian Response Plan aimed at 
addressing the multisectoral needs of 1.3 million people over the next six months. This is in addition 
to the 5.5 million people already targeted under the 2026 Humanitarian Response Plan, which requires 
US$632 million in funding. 
 
Impact on infrastructure 
 Authorities report at least 856 affected buildings, including 190 that have collapsed.  
 As part of recovery and reconstruction planning, authorities have identified 40 sites in La Guaira 
State, covering approximately 584,000 square metres, for the development of housing projects 
intended for affected populations.  
 Situation Report No. 21 
 Earthquakes in Venezuela 
 14 July 2026 
 Time: 9:00 pm 
 
4,734 
16,740 
People 
dead 
 
People 
injured
OCHA | 2 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 An initial assessment by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) indicates 
that direct damage to housing and infrastructure amounts to approximately US$37 billion. Most of 
the damage, estimated at around US$24 billion, is concentrated  in housing, businesses, schools, 
hospitals, and public facilities. Meanwhile, preliminary estimates by UNDP indicate direct physical 
damage of US$6.7 billion, equivalent to 6 per cent of GDP. 
 
National response 
 The Government response remains focused on search and rescue operations, as well as assistance 
to affected people. 
 According to authorities, the response continues with 107 transitional camps supporting affected 
populations, with a capacity of 25,152 people and a current occupancy of 20,936 people. As of 
14 July, 40 camps are located in Caracas, 29 in Miranda, 28 in La Guaira, and 10 in Aragua. 
 Authorities are advancing a unified registration process for affected families in transitional camps 
through the collection of biometric and contact information to support assistance management, social 
support programmes and housing solutions. 
 The Government of Venezuela announced the creation of an initial reconstruction fund equivalent to 
US$200 million. 
 A psychosocial support hotline remains available for affected people: 0800-AYUDA-01. 
 A digital form has been launched by the National Council for Persons with Disabilities (CONAPDIS) 
to support a timely and inclusive response in affected areas. 
 Mechanisms have been established to locate missing persons (www.localizapacientes.com) and to 
report affected individuals (0-800-RESCATE). 
 School activities remain suspended in affected municipalities across the states of Aragua (Santiago 
Mariño, Girardot, Ocumare de la Costa de Oro and Tovar); Carabobo (Juan José Mora, Puerto 
Cabello, Naguanagua and Valencia); Falcón (José Laurencio Silva); La Guaira (Vargas); the Capital 
District (Libertador); and Miranda (Chacao, Baruta, El Hatillo, Sucre, Plaza, Zamora, Acevedo, Brión, 
Buroz, Páez, Andrés Bello and Pedro Gual). 
 
Situation by state 
Capital District (Caracas) and Miranda  
 In Chacao municipality, Miranda state, authorities confirmed 68 deaths and the collapse of four 
buildings. Of the structures assessed, 46 have been classified as red- tagged and are considered 
uninhabitable. 
 
Response actions: Organizations such as Tinta Violeta, FUNDANA and World Vision are providing 
protection support to affected families, particularly through psychosocial assistance.  
 
La Guaira 
 Authorities and humanitarian organizations continue strengthening the response in La Guaira’s 
transitional camps through the expansion of multisectoral services, improvements in accommodation 
conditions and coordinated assistance management. T he distribution of essential items, food 
assistance, protection activities, health and psychosocial support interventions, as well as actions to 
improve access to safe water, sanitation, connectivity and community infrastructure, continue. 
 
Carabobo and Yaracuy (epicentral zone) 
 In Carabobo, the most significant impacts continue to be concentrated in Juan José Mora 
municipality (Morón parish). In Yaracuy, particularly in Veroes municipality and other localities near 
the epicentral area, homes have been reported as destroyed or at high risk. Recent assessments 
have identified priority needs in protection, mental health and psychosocial support, health, shelter, 
water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), and food security. 
 
Response actions: Five organizations (Venezuelan Red Cross, CESAP, Tierra Viva, Cáritas Morón 
and Empodérame) are providing response in health, food, water and the distribution of humanitarian 
assistance.
OCHA | 3 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 
Falcón (Tucacas – Silva municipality) 
 The emergency remains concentrated in Silva Municipality (Tucacas and Boca de Aroa). A 
magnitude 3.3 earthquake with its epicentre in Boca de Aroa renewed concerns over the weekend 
and prompted preventive evacuations along the eastern coast of the state.  Soil liquefaction 
associated with the two earthquakes continues to affect 87 houses in the parish, impacting 252 
people. 
 Boca de Yaracuy Bridge remains the most severely damaged transport infrastructure, and plans are 
underway to establish a temporary detour while reconstruction takes place. La Pava, El Paují and 
Punta Brava bridges remain operational under speed restrictions and controls on heavy vehicle 
traffic. Technical teams continue monitoring water levels in the Aroa River and Los Ingleses channel 
due to the risk of seasonal flooding, amid a multi-hazard scenario. 
 
Response actions: Protection Cluster training activities continue, alongside water, sanitation and 
hygiene (WASH) interventions and psychosocial support activities in Boca de Aroa and Palmasola, 
implemented by ACH, Azul Positivo, IOM, Centroccidente, ODISEF and AVSI in coor dination with 
regional authorities. Training on psychological first aid requested by Civil Protection for 
approximately 300 officials is also progressing. 
 
Other states 
 Apure: Approximately 250 displaced people from the central coastal region remain in the state. The 
Local Coordination Forum (LCF) continues to monitor the situation and provide multisectoral 
assistance, including psychological first aid. 
 Bolívar: Response efforts for families arriving in the state continue. VEN 911 maintains reception, 
registration and comprehensive assistance mechanisms, including psychosocial support and 
medical assessments, while institutional response capacity is being strengt hened through 
psychological first aid training for officials. Temporary accommodation remains available for 41 
displaced families (127 people, including 60 adults, 10 older persons, 42 children and 15 
adolescents), with the VEN 911 facility in Caroní serving as the main transitional camp. Coordination 
between authorities and humanitarian actors continues to strengthen case follow-up and assistance 
to affected families. 
 Delta Amacuro: Preparations are being reinforced to assist affected people expected to arrive in 
the state on 15 July. Planned actions include the provision of immediate food assistance for the first 
72 hours by WFP, the distribution of hygiene kits by Cáritas Delta Amacuro, and food baskets for 
families with children by World Vision. Tierra Viva is also assessing the distribution of children's kits. 
Together with UNICEF, mechanisms are being reviewed to provide education kits to out -of-school 
children and facilitate their enrolment in alternative learning spaces. The inclusion of reunified 
families in WFP food assistance programmes is also under consideration. In addition, the Directorate 
of Social Development is being trained in the use of a registration tool. 
 Sucre: Cáritas Carúpano trained more than 241 people from various institutions in psychological 
first aid, in coordination with the Carúpano Municipal Government through the Fundación Carúpano. 
 Táchira: Mobile teams from IOM and ODISEF assisted 11 people on the move at the San Cristóbal 
bus terminal (five women, three men and three children), providing psychological first aid and dignity 
kits. 
 Zulia: Triage and assistance for displaced people continue at the Maracaibo bus terminal, in 
coordination with ASONACOP and the Venezuelan Red Cross, to facilitate safe transportation. 
 Trujillo and Lara:  Local Coordination Forums remain active, and previously reported monitoring 
and relief item collection activities continue, including follow -up on assistance and protection risks 
affecting people on the move. 
 
Humanitarian coordination 
 OCHA, together with the Humanitarian Coordinator and in coordination with national authorities, 
continues to coordinate the humanitarian response with the United Nations and partner 
organizations, prioritizing actions in health, shelter, food security, WASH, logistics and protection.
OCHA | 4 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 UNDAC and OCHA continued supporting Civil Protection in strengthening emergency coordination 
and information management capacities, including technical exchanges on USAR coordination 
mechanisms and operational tracking tools. 
 A total of 71 search and rescue teams from 31 countries, comprising 2,786 personnel and 216 search 
dogs, were deployed to the worst-affected areas in support of rescue operations. The total includes 
teams that are currently being demobilized. 
 OCHA continued strengthening coordination with the private sector to support response and early 
recovery efforts, promoting engagement with specialized actors in areas such as logistics, debris 
management, infrastructure rehabilitation and reconstruction planning through existing coordination 
mechanisms between the United Nations and the private sector. 
 Venezuelan authorities requested the activation of the Post -Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) 
within the framework of the United Nations system and with the support of UNDP. In line with the 
internationally recognized PDNA methodology, the corresponding coordination efforts with relevant 
counterparts will be advanced. 
 A uthorities informed the activation of a special mechanism to expedite the processing of a “Work 
Visa for Special Situations” through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The procedure will be carried out 
online under the coordination of the Office of the Vice Minister for Multilateral Affairs and the Consular 
Affairs Office. It is intended for foreign personnel of international organizations, as well as United 
Nations staff, deploying to Venezuela in support of the response to the earthquake emergency.  
 
Initial humanitarian response 
Food Security 
 
 Since the beginning of the emergency response, WFP has reached 67,520 people with food 
assistance. On 14 July, WFP continued supporting populations affected by the earthquake through 
the distribution of family food baskets and the provision of hot meals. A total of 750 family food 
baskets were distributed in communities across Sucre parish in Libertador municipality (Distrito 
Capital) and Carlos Soublette parish (La Guaira), reaching 3,000 people. In addition, 125 family food 
baskets were provided to support meal preparation in temporary shelters located in Catia La Mar 
and Carlos Soublette parish, benefiting 500 people. These baskets contain essential dry food 
commodities and cover approximately 75 percent of household food requirements for 30 days. 
 Furthermore, through its partners, WFP provided 6,756 hot meals (lunch and dinner) for 
approximately 3,400 people across three transitional camps: the José María Vargas Sports Stadium, 
the César Nieves Baseball Stadium, and the Playa Grande community, helping ensure continued 
access to food for displaced and affected families. 
 
Health 
 
 As of 12 July, 22 international Emergency Medical Teams (EMTs) had been deployed, were 
mobilizing or were demobilizing in earthquake-affected areas, supporting the health response 
through emergency medical care, field hospitals, mobile health services and specialized assistance, 
and complementing national capacities. 
 IOM has provided health services to 4,640 people across priority transitional camps in La Guaira. 
 UNICEF continued operating its health point in the Playa Grande transitional camp, where it provided 
care to 21 people (eight women, nine men, two girls and two boys). UNICEF also announced that, 
as of 15 July, the facility will be dedicated exclusively to immunization activities to strengthen 
vaccination coverage within the transitorial camp. 
 Through its partner Ven Da Tu Mano (VDTM), UNFPA delivered sexual and reproductive health 
(SRH) services in the José María Vargas Sports Complex, César Nieves Stadium and Playa Grande 
transitional camps, reaching 125 people through individual consultations. During the reporting 
period, teams conducted 31 antenatal care visits, inserted 84 subdermal contraceptive implants, and 
administered 10 injectable contraceptives. In addition, 172 SRH counselling and awareness-raising 
sessions were carried out.
OCHA | 5 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 In the Playa Grande transitional camp, Project HOPE conducted 39 medical consultations and 
distributed medicines, while Ven Da Tu Mano provided 69 primary health- care consultations, 
including general medicine, paediatrics, gynaecology and internal medicine. 
 The Spanish Red Cross established an emergency clinic in La Guaira, providing health services to 
200 people through service points located at the baseball field and San José Hospital. The main 
needs addressed included chronic diseases, earthquake-related injuries and mental health support. 
The operation is being implemented in coordination with the Venezuelan Red Cross and continues 
to provide assistance to affected populations. 
 Fundación Proyecto Maniapure (FPM) conducted a multidisciplinary mobile health outreach in Punta 
Care community (Naiguatá parish, La Guaira), providing 82 services to 76 people. Services included 
primary health care, internal medicine, family medicine, obstetrics and gynaecology, nutrition, 
physiotherapy, mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS), sexual and reproductive health 
(SRH), and the distribution of medicines. Assessments identified a high demand for care related to 
chronic conditions, particularly hypertension and diabetes among older persons, as well as cases of 
diarrhoeal diseases. Hygiene kits were also distributed based on identified needs. 
 International Medical Corps (IMC) continues to deploy Mobile Medical Units (MMUs) across La 
Guaira State, providing free medical consultations, medicines and mental health services through 
three service points: the La Lucha MMU, located at Farmatodo in Catia La Mar; the Playa Grande 
MMU, located at Farmatodo in Playa Grande; and the Type 1 EMT, located at the Catia La Mar 
Passenger Terminal near Dr. Alfredo Machado Outpatient Clinic. IMC also continues to cover 
affected communities and other priority locations to strengthen health response capacity. Teams 
include three general practitioners, three nurses, two paediatricians, one obstetrics and gynaecology 
specialist, support staff, and Mental Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS) personnel. 
 Between 1 and 13 July 2026, IMC's mobile medical units conducted a total of 1,408 consultations in 
earthquake-affected communities in La Guaira. Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) accounted for 
the largest proportion of consultations, with 656 cases (46.6 per cent), followed by communicable 
diseases, with 526 consultations (37.4 per cent). In addition, teams provided 90 mental health and 
psychosocial support consultations (6.4 per cent), 86 sexual and reproductive health consultations 
(6.1 per cent) and 50 trauma and injury consultations (3.6 per cent). These figures indicate sustained 
demand for primary health care, chronic disease management, communicable disease surveillance, 
sexual and reproductive health services, psychosocial support and injury care, underscoring the 
importance of maintaining essential services and community follow -up in the most heavily affected 
areas. 
 
Logistics and Telecommunications 
 
 The Logistics Working Group (LWG) supported the transportation of medical supplies in La Guaira 
for Médecins du Monde through common logistics services provided free of charge. Coordination 
with partners continues to facilitate the provision of storage and transport services in line with the 
LWG's available capacities. 
 
.  Nutrition 
 UNICEF established three breastfeeding support spaces in three transitional  camps, providing 
guidance and assistance to breastfeeding mothers. 
 
 Protection (including Children and Gender-Based Violence) 
  
 IOM has provided protection assistance to 216 people through the transitional camps supported by 
the organization. 
 UNHCR continued providing legal counselling, psychosocial support, documentation assistance and 
referrals to specialized services in transitional camps across La Guaira. On 14 July, a total of 51 
people, including children and adolescents, participated in protection activities, legal assistance,
OCHA | 6 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
case management, psychosocial support, counselling and referrals to specialized services in the 
Playa Grande, César Nieves Stadium and José María Vargas Sports Complex transitional camps. 
 UNHCR supported coordination among government institutions responsible for the management 
and handling of protection cases that will provide services in the César Nieves Stadium transitional 
camp. As part of these efforts, referral pathways were strengthened and a directory of focal points 
was established to facilitate affected populations’ access to specialized protection services. 
 Through its partner FUNDAINIL, UNICEF provided protection services in the Playa Grande 
transitional camp, reaching 40 children and adolescents and 12 adults through Child- Friendly 
Spaces, recreational, sports and play-based activities, as well as awareness-raising activities on the 
prevention of child sexual abuse, the right to positive treatment and positive parenting. One case 
was also referred to the child protection system. 
 UNFPA carried out gender -based violence (GBV) prevention and response activities in the José 
María Vargas Sports Complex, César Nieves Stadium and Playa Grande transitional camps, 
reaching 94 people through community awareness-raising activities, including adolescents, pregnant 
women and breastfeeding women. In addition, UNFPA provided five psychosocial support 
interventions, followed up on two protection cases, and conducted awareness -raising activities on 
safe referral mechanisms and access to specialized services. 
 
Shelter and Non-Food Items 
 Since the onset of the earthquake response, IOM has supported the management and coordination 
of five identified transitional camps in La Guaira, reaching 6,290 unique individuals through the 
delivery of 9,876 services. Activities include site management and coordination, registration, 
community engagement, information management and case referrals, facilitating displaced 
populations’ access to essential services. 
 In parallel, IOM continues to support improvements in transitional camps, including shelter upgrades 
and enhancements to basic site infrastructure. The organization is also strengthening coordination 
with authorities and humanitarian partners to help improve living conditions and facilitate affected 
families’ access to assistance.  As part of the effort, IOM has distributed core relief items to 4,244 
people. 
 To date, in the José María Vargas Sports Complex transitional camp, UNHCR has installed a total 
of 30 floodlights to improve lighting in communal areas and mitigate protection risks. 
  
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH)  
 
 UNICEF and its partners continue to provide 80,000 litres of safe water per day across the three 
identified transitional camps in La Guaira, benefiting approximately 3,500 people. In addition, as of 
12 July, more than 1,730 hygiene kits had been distributed, reaching over 6,900 people. 
 UNICEF also continues to strengthen sanitation and hygiene conditions in transitional camps through 
the installation of at least 86 portable toilets and 48 handwashing stations, as well as the regular 
cleaning and maintenance of these facilities. As of 12 July, UNICEF had also distributed more than 
300 waste containers, along with garbage bags and basic cleaning supplies, and continues to 
support hygiene promotion activities. 
 International Medical Corps (IMC) continues to support access to safe water through the provision 
of drinking water via water trucks. 
Humanitarian financing and contributions  
 The United Nations humanitarian chief, Tom Fletcher, announced an additional appeal under the 
Humanitarian Response Plan for Venezuela. The appeal outlines the multisectoral needs of 1.3 
million people over the next six months. To reach those in need, US$298  million is required, in 
addition to the US$632 million requested at the beginning of the year. 
 IOM launched a US$98 million appeal to assist 850,000 people and support 140 entities over the 
next six months. PAHO/WHO launched an emergency appeal for nearly US$24 million to support 
health response and early recovery activities over the next six months and released US$1.5 million 
from the Contingency Fund for Emergencies. WFP launched an initial appeal for US$80 million
OCHA | 7 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
to provide food assistance to 500,000 people over a six -month period.  UNHCR requires 
US$14.8 million to support up to 30,000 affected people over the next six months. 
 A shipment from Switzerland arrived on 13 July carrying one metric ton of medical supplies. 
 The Government of Italy allocated US$5.7 million to support the humanitarian response to the 
earthquakes, helping deliver life-saving assistance, protection and access to essential services for 
affected populations through AICS, WFP and IFRC. 
 Caritas Spain announced an increase in its contribution to €1 million to support the earthquake 
response in Venezuela, including the €300,000 mobilized during the first days of the emergency. 
This support is complemented by the deployment of representatives from Caritas Spain and other 
Cáritas network organizations in the country, providing technical and coordination support in WASH, 
food security, livelihoods, risk management and shelter. 
 A new European Union Humanitarian Air Bridge flight landed on 13 July carrying 29 metric tonnes 
of shelter and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) supplies. The cargo included European Union-
funded assistance for IOM, Irish-funded support for GOAL Global, and UNICEF supplies. 
 The Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) allocated US$15 million to support a multisectoral 
response, alongside the activation of the Venezuela Humanitarian Fund (VHF). Norway contributed 
to support the response through CERF. 
 The United States  announced a US$100 million contribution to the VHF, in addition to a further 
US$100 million in bilateral funding for response operations implemented by IOM, WFP, UNICEF, 
International Medical Corps, Catholic Relief Services, Samaritan’s Purse, Proyecto Es peranza and 
the Red Cross. 
 Germany and the Republic of Korea contributed US$5 million and US$1.25 million, respectively, to 
the VHF to support humanitarian action in the country.  
 On 14 July, the Republic of Korea  announced an additional allocation of US$3.5 million  in 
humanitarian assistance. Of this amount, US$3 million will be channelled through UNDP to support 
debris removal activities, while the remainder will be provided in-kind, specifically through 30 metric 
tons of temporary shelters (family tents) . The Republic of Korea had previously allocated 
US$1.25 million to WFP and US$2.5 million to UNICEF in support of the humanitarian response in 
Venezuela. 
 Japan allocated US$3.5 million to support the earthquake response. The funding will provide 
humanitarian assistance in key sectors, including food security, health care, shelter and non- food 
items, through WFP, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) 
and IOM. 
 The European Union allocated €5 million to support the emergency response, in addition to the €52 
million already allocated this year for humanitarian operations in the country. 
 Australia announced a US$2 million contribution to support the provision of food, shelter, healthcare 
and access to safe water through IFRC and WFP. 
 Switzerland announced a contribution of CHF 2.5 million to support the response. 
 Sweden allocated SEK 25 million to support the humanitarian response through food assistance, 
water, temporary shelter, protection and family reunification programmes implemented by WFP, 
UNHCR and Save the Children. 
 Denmark announced an additional contribution of DKK 11 million to support the humanitarian 
response, including DKK 10 million through UNHCR and DKK 1 million through DanChurchAid and 
the Danish Red Cross. 
 The Disasters Emergency Committee ( DEC) announced an initial allocation of £7.5 million for the 
earthquake response in Venezuela, including £2 million contributed by the United Kingdom 
Government through UK Aid Match. The funds will be implemented by DEC member agencies and 
their local partners to support the humanitarian response. 
 As part of the support provided by UNDAC, the team includes a private sector coordination specialist 
to strengthen business engagement in response and recovery efforts. A private sector contributions 
tracker for the Venezuela earthquake response is available at https://ven-
eq.connectingbusiness.org, together with a briefing note for the private sector outlining opportunities 
for engagement. Focal point: sanchez21@un.org.  
 OCHA continues to coordinate with donors and partners to ensure rapid, strategic and needs-based 
allocation of resources.
OCHA | 8 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact information 
For more information, please contact the OCHA Venezuela Office: 
 
Vanessa May – Head of Office a.i. – mayv@un.org  
Alfonso Zabaleta – Humanitarian Affairs Officer – alfonso.zabaleta@un.org  
Jennifer Moreno – Public Information Officer – moreno7@un.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Support the humanitarian response to address the earthquake in Venezuela 
Make your donation safely and quickly now: 
https://crisisrelief.un.org/en/donate-venezuela-crisis