Published On 6 Jul 2026
6 Jul 2026
A Russian missile and drone attack on Ukraine’s Kyiv has killed at least 10 people and damaged more than a dozen residential buildings in the second large-scale assault on the Ukrainian capital in less than a week.
The attack early on Monday morning injured at least 46 people in Kyiv, according to Tymur Tkachenko, head of the city’s military administration.
Recommended Stories 
list of 4 items
end of list
Another person was killed and 10 others were injured in districts surrounding Kyiv, according to authorities.
Ukraine’s military said Russia fired 68 missiles and 351 drones overnight.
The Kyiv Independent reported that the first explosions were heard at about 1:40am local time, followed by more strikes at 2:10am and 3:15am.
Thousands of residents fled to underground shelters, it reported, as air raid sirens sounded across Ukraine.
At least 15 buildings were damaged in Kyiv in the strikes, including four in the capital’s historic Podilskyi district, Tkachenko said.
Rescue work is under way across the capital and the death toll could rise, he said.
“Unfortunately, this is not the final information,” Tkachenko told reporters as the death toll jumped to nine from seven in Kyiv.
In his nightly address on Sunday, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy warned that another Russian assault might be coming before the NATO summit in Turkiye this week.
He is due to meet United States President Donald Trump on the sidelines of the summit, which begins on Tuesday.
“Intelligence once again indicates that the Russians are preparing a new massive strike,” Zelenskyy said, according to the Kyiv Independent.
“This is typical of Putin: right after America’s Independence Day and before the NATO summit in Ankara.”
Late last week, Russia hit the Ukrainian capital with dozens of missiles and hundreds of drones, killing 31 people.
The strikes were the deadliest to hit Kyiv this year.
Both Russia and Ukraine have recently expanded their use of long-range weapons, including missiles, marking a new front in the four-year war.
Ukraine has focused its attacks on Russian energy facilities to weaken its war efforts.
Mikhail Razvozhayev, the governor of Russian-controlled Sevastopol, a Black Sea port in Crimea, said on Monday a Ukrainian strike near the city had knocked out electricity supplies.
“Following an enemy attack on energy infrastructure near Sevastopol, our city was temporarily left without electricity,” Razvozhayev wrote on Telegram.