Page 1 of 13 
 
Livelihoods and Economic Inclusion 
 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) 
 
2026-2028 
 
Introduction 
 
The purpose of this document is to provide Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for the programmes that 
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and its implementing Partners 
are providing in the area of livelihood  to forcibly displaced and stateless persons . These procedures aim to 
enhance the capacities and inclusion of forcibly displaced and stateless  persons (FDSP) in the 
implementation process and to support partners implementing livelihoods towards building resilience and 
self-reliance through enterprising, skilling or business development activities. The SOP will ensure effective, 
consistent and accountable delivery and monitoring of the interventions and harmoniz e approaches among 
partners in providing services to FDSP. 
   
These SOP apply for UNHCR and sector partners who are involved in the design, implementation, and 
monitoring of resilience and livelihood interventions . The SOP are intended to complement the UNHCR 
South Sudan operational strategy  and to assist UNHCR staff and sector partners in the execution and 
management of interventions that support multi-year plan s and the implementation of the Government 
2023 Global Refugee Form (GRF) pledges on Jobs and Livelihoods, Environment and Climate. 
 
Enabling Environment, Advocacy and Data for Inclusion 
 
• Legal and Institutional Mapping 
UNHCR and partners will systematically analyse  laws, regulations and institutional arrangements 
governing labour markets, financial services, business registration, land, and social protection to 
identify legal and practical barriers and opportunities for FDSP. 
 
• Law and Policy Engagement 
Based on the mapping, UNHCR will advocate with government and regulators for 
evidence-informed reforms to ensure FDSP have legal and practical access to decent work, 
productive land, financial services, and national social protection schemes on par with na tionals. 
 
• Data and Evidence 
Beyond project baselines, Sub office and field operations will generate and use socio-economic data 
(including market segmentation and skills profiling) to build an investment case for inclusion of 
refugees in national economic and social protection systems.
Page 2 of 13 
 
• Private Sector Engagement 
Private sector actors (employers, FSPs, value -chain companies) will be engaged not only as 
implementers but as strategic partners in advocacy, co -design and scale -up of inclusive business 
models. 
Phase 1: Targeting and Identification and Assessment  
 
Beneficiary baseline assessments using the livelihood information system survey tools1, designed to support 
the identification of individual and market priorities and appropriate livelihood strategies fit for the context, 
should be used by UNHCR and partners implementing livelihood activities. 
 
Targeting  
Where the criteria are not predefined as in earmarked projects, the selection of potential participants for 
livelihood support will take into account the socioeconomic situation and the protection needs of the 
applicants. This will ensure that the livelihood interventions will not only enhance the skills and abilities of 
the participants but also serve as a protection tool to address the vulnerabilities while targeting those who 
demonstrate potential to achieve self-reliance. 
 
Targeting methods 
a) Capacity-based/Self-Targeting: This method allows the applicants to self -select themselves based 
on their own assessment of their needs and the criteria set by the programme. The applicants 
provide information about their eligibility for the assistance using the expression of interest form 
(Expression of Interest Form_.docx ). This method is useful when there is a clear and transparent 
definition of the criteria , suitable for decent work opportunities  and when the applicants have 
access to reliable information. 
 
b) Community-based targeting: This method involves the participation of the community leaders and 
members in identifying the eligible beneficiaries. This method is suitable when there is a strong and 
representative community structure and when the programme aims to address specific is sues such 
as meeting the gender and disability target.  
 
c) Categorical Targeting: This method uses predefined categories of beneficiaries that are relevant for 
the programme objectives. The categories can be based on demographic, socio -economic, or 
vulnerability factors. The categorical targeting can be verified through key informant interviews and 
focus group discussions. This method is effective when categories are already defined in earmarked 
projects and are easy to identify and verify with the community representatives or through existing 
databases such as ProGres V4. 
 
An additional targeting pathway will include referrals from the Protection Unit to reinforce gender and 
disability inclusion within livelihoods programming. Protection colleagues, refer individuals and households 
with specific protection risks, including women, persons with disabilities, older persons, and other at -risk 
 
1 Livelihood Beneficiary and endline survey (https://lis.unhcr.org/home)
Page 3 of 13 
 
groups, who may not be reached through standard targeting channels. These referrals will be reviewed 
against the agreed selection criteria and, where appropriate, prioritized for livelihoods support . 
 
 
 
BETTER-OFF Possess productive and other high-value assets, working in skilled jobs, and can be 
targeted for Microfinance Assistance (Commercial loans, Business development services, 
Information provision. 
LESS VULNERABLE - Possess productive assets, working in semi-skilled jobs or with more security, 
able to meet basic needs – Can be targeted for Microfinance assistance, financial literacy, business 
Development and Job placement assistance. 
SOCIO-ECONOMICALLY VULNERABLE Limited assets, skills and experience, working in low-
skilled jobs or as casual labor, living in poverty. Can be targeted for TVET Skilling, entrepreneurship 
training, Business start-ups, grants, Coaching/mentoring, Microfinance Savings and Agriculture 
support) 
EXTREMELY SOCIO-ECONOMICALLY VULNERABLE 
No assets, skills or experience, social vulnerabilities, majority unemployed, living in, extreme poverty 
and using negative coping strategies (can be targeted consumption support, safety nets including 
CBI, basic skilling, and agriculture support to help them stabilize on the path to start livelihood) 
 
This four‑tier vulnerability and capacity categorization above is aligned with UNHCR’s market segmentation 
approach for economic and financial inclusion ( most vulnerable, at risk of sliding into poverty, building 
resilience, economically active ). The ‘extremely socio ‑economically vulnerable ’ correspond to most 
vulnerable and will primarily be linked to social/humanitarian protection and safety nets, while the 
‘better‑off’ group corresponds to economically active and will be prioritized for formal financial inclusion 
and SME‑oriented services. 
 
Expression of interest (EOI) 
Livelihood opportunities for entrepreneurship, business development, Skilling and microfinance support will 
be advertised and delivered through a capacity -based targeting method. Applicants would be required to 
express interest by completing the expression  of interest forms ( see example Expression of Interest 
Form.docx) 
 
Selection Criteria  
If not predefined, UNHCR, Livelihoods committee/refugee-led Organisations will collaborate with Sector 
Partners to define the selection criteria for different livelihood interventions. They will use working sessions 
to determine/validate the selection criteria for each livelihood intervention strategy. The committee and the 
BETTER
OFF
LESS VULNERABLE 
SOCIO-ECONOMICALLY VULNERABLE 
EXTREMELY SOCIO-ECONOMICALLY VULNERABLE
Page 4 of 13 
 
Partners will also inform the community about the upcoming interventions and the targeting criteria using 
suitable methods for their context, such as posters, community meetings, or public announcements.  
 
Validation and approval of shortlisted applicants 
The Sector partner will establish the list of initially shortlisted applicants. UNHCR's support will include 
status verification, and specific needs assessment.  The shortlist and the reasons for the acceptance or 
rejection of applicants will be presented to a Validation Committee in a plenary session. The Validation 
Committee will have representatives from the community leaders Livelihoods Committee, UNHCR, the 
partner or agencies involved in the sector and refugee representatives. The final lists to be val idated in 
proGres against the gender and disability target and ensure compliance as per the project design . UNHCR 
retains the decision-making authority over the selection of the Final Beneficiaries or Eligible Interventions . 
 
Litigation/Grievance Committee 
The litigation committee, which consists of at least two (2) members appointed by the Validation Committee, 
UNHCR and the sector partner, will handle any appeals from persons/groups who were not selected for 
support. The appeals must be submitted within 7 days after the announcement of the selection results. The 
committee will listen to the complainants' arguments and provide documentary evidence to justify its 
decision. If the committee finds that some clients were wrongly excluded, they shall be considered positively 
and be added to the final list of project participants. 
 
Signature of commitment 
Participants will agree to be monitored by annually. For activities such as capitalisation grants and placement 
of livestock, commitment letters would include a pass -on-the-gift clause. Whereby, participants agree to 
hand over same value of project benefits in kind or cash to the eligible beneficiary  on the waiting list. 
Penalties like exclusion in future assistance, should mismanagement of support , and any form of f raud be 
established and should be included in the commitment signed from the prospective beneficiaries. 
 
Baseline assessment using the Livelihoods Monitoring Tool 
Following the approval of the list of  selected persons/groups by UNHCR the baseline assessment survey 
available at livelihoods monitoring (see example baseline assessment ) should be completed in the first 
Quarter (Q1) to establish the starting point of participants and to allow better monitoring of activities and 
to measure progress over time.  
Phase 2 – Livelihoods and economic inclusion interventions 
 
Interventions shall be design ed towards attainment of the five 2026-2030 Livelihood Strategic objectives 
and through the below Livelihood strategies. All interventions financed with OA13 will be designed with 
clear theories of change, scalability potential and realistic phase ‑out strategies, in line with UNHCR’s 
guidance to avoid fragmented short‑term projects with limited impact. 
 
1. Vocational Training and Skills Development: 
Deliver market-driven vocational training in high -demand trades (e.g., digital skills (Coursera online), 
construction, crafts, agri -business, auto mechanics) , Partnership with private organizations and national 
technical institutes for recognized certification and job placement pathways.  Wherever possible, UNHCR 
and partners will leverage existing national TVET institutions, accredited training providers and online
Page 5 of 13 
 
platforms such as the Coursera ‑UNHCR partnership instead of creating parallel, short ‑term training 
schemes. 
 
2. Employment Creation Initiatives: 
Facilitate job matching, internship, Cash for work, and on -the-job training opportunities through local 
business partnerships for refugees with professional experience.  Support skill profiling, and business 
registration. 
3. Enterprise and Market Systems Development: 
Provision of micro-grants, productive assets, and mentorship to launch small businesses  and agribusiness. 
Promote mechanized and climate -smart agricultural practices, agroforestry (fruit and medicinal tree 
seedlings; energy -efficient stoves), resilient livestock value chains, and post -harvest storag e, climate 
adaptation structures and early warning systems supported. 
 
4. Financial Inclusion and Local Financing: 
Promote digital payments (Mobile Money), facilitate access to capital and payments through partnerships 
with microfinance institutions. 
Community-based savings and loans (VSLAs) will be the preferred first-line mechanism for informal financial 
access and as a bridge to formal financial services. Revolving loan funds will only be used in exceptional 
contexts where private sector financial service providers cannot operate, and where partners demonstrate 
robust capacity to manage, supervise and monitor the fund 
 
Social Protection and Safety Nets 
 
UNHCR and partners will systematically assess national social protection systems and identify opportunities 
to align livelihood -related CBI and safety nets with existing government programmes . Where feasible, 
refugee households will be progressively linked to national social assistance, social insurance and 
labour-market programmes, with UNHCR support focused on advocacy, data, and time -bound gap-filling.. 
Actors shall work to harmonize protocols for targeting beneficiaries and be guided by  the data -sharing 
agreement when targeting refugees  with social assistance, through direct income support, labour-based 
works and livelihood support. 
 
Economic inclusion  
a) Entrepreneurship training and Business Development 
Selected participant for entrepreneurship training should receive training in entrepreneur ship. This could 
include more detailed training in entrepreneurial skills, following well-established entrepreneurship training 
models such as the ILO-conceived Start and Improve Your Business ( SIYB) programme  or government 
approved entrepreneurship curriculum. As far as possible, training beyond basic training should be provided 
by government accredited certified institutions which ensure a certain technical quality, and which grant 
recognized qualifications. 
 
The individual participating in the entrepreneurship programme should be engaged to  develop a business 
plan (see Sample Business Plan for Groups and IGAs.docx) with support from the sector partner. The purpose 
of the business plan is to express the value proposition of the project  and forecast its expenses against its 
turnover to determine its profitability. The partner should help the participant improve the conceptualization 
of the project to make it profitable. All business plans would be documented, shared with UNHCR before
Page 6 of 13 
 
grant processing which will be disbursed through UNHCR Financial Service provider  and Cash Assist tools. 
(Please see detailed activity process Grant_Business_Enterprise Development Programme.docx ) 
 
 
 
 
b) Vocational and skills training 
A skilling program should be designed based on the needs and opportunities of the target population. The 
aim is to quip individuals with the practical knowledge and expertise needed to enter specific trades or 
professions based on the market demands . To participate in the programme, participants should express 
interest and be subjected to a  selection process where prospective participants  will be assessed on their 
motivation and suitability for the program . Referrals from the protection program will be directly included 
to ensure gender and disability inclusion considerations. 
 
The skilling program should use a mix of delivery methods, such as classroom instruction, hands-on training, 
and online learning, to cater to the different learning styles and preferences of the participants. The 
participants should also receive support for job matching  within refugee response programmes , such as 
mentorship, startup grants, internships job placement assistance, and access to additional training services.  
(Please see detailed activity process Vocational and Skills Development Process.docx  ) New stand ‑alone 
training centres will only be considered where no suitable national or private providers exist and with a clear 
sustainability and handover plan.
Page 7 of 13 
 
 
 
c) Agriculture, livestock and fisheries enterprise development  
To enhance food security, productivity and sustainable resource management, sector partners sh all 
collaborate with local farmers, herders, and community leaders to identify and support suitable agricultural 
and livestock practices, technologies, and value chains that match the local socio-economic context.  
Sector partners should also provide training on climate smart farming techniques as part of the integrated 
agriculture and livestock programme. These may include climate-smart crop varieties and animal breeds that 
are adapted to the local environment and water management practices such as water harvesting to optimize 
irrigation. The Block  farm model can be used to showcase new technologies and best practices. Seed 
multiplication farms should be adopted as a strategic approach to improving the seed system with improved 
post-harvest handling and storage technologies.  
Furthermore, sector partners should work to develop market linkages and value chains . This may include 
the establishment of producer cooperatives to enhance production capacity and the introduction of value -
addition techniques to increase the market value of products. The provision of productive inputs such as 
access to tools, seeds, tillage services, machinery and credit should be promoted for increased productivity. 
FAO has a comparative advantage on the agriculture sector and should be consulted for technical support 
and guidance on agriculture matters.  
d) Decent Work (Wage Employment Creation) 
To enhance the realization of refugee rights related to decent work and expand opportunities for 
employment, income generation, and sustainable livelihoods, UNHCR and its partners will promote access 
to decent work through wage employment creation. Skilled refugees will be supported to actively participate 
in and contribute to local market and resilience-building efforts within refugee-hosting areas. 
Support interventions will include providing individual refugees and refugee associations with updated 
information on labor rights, wage employment, and self -employment opportunities. Refugees and asylum -
Page 8 of 13 
 
seekers holding diplomas or professional certifications from their countries of origin will receive guidance 
on procedures for the recognition of their qualifications and access to relevant job opportunities. 
Furthermore, employment initiatives will be exp anded to create jobs for youth, refugees, and host 
communities for at least 6 or 12 months  while increasing information sharing and technical assistance to 
financial service providers to improve refugees’ access to financial services.  
e) Environment and climate Resilience 
Sector partners will promote green and climate action activities while employing a community participatory 
approach working collaboratively through supporting community action plan to develop green and climate 
smart enterprises that address climate threats and enhance access to income generation. Interventions  may 
include, establishing community tree nurseries, promoting agroforestry practices, and encouraging the use 
of renewable fuels and improved cook stoves to address environmental challenges and promote 
sustainability. 
 
Financial Inclusion 
 
Microfinance   
Microfinance is a useful tool and allows individuals participate in the financial system, build assets and should 
be promoted for micro-entrepreneurs. These services may include savings schemes, such as village savings 
and loans associations ( VSLAs) and credit products, such as grant funds and loans, that fosters 
entrepreneurship. Microfinance interventions will be designed to avoid over -indebtedness and market 
distortion, with careful screening of existing debts, transparent pricing and alignment with national financial 
consumer-protection standards 
 
Funding and transfers for productive assets or employment 
 
a) Modality 
Cash is the preferred funding modality  for the provision of  capitalisation/startup grants  and productive 
assets all delivered through Cash Assist . The participants should be closely monitored as appropriate to 
ensure that the funds are used properly. Payments should be done in instalments on condition that 
milestones agreed upon to be achieved with the funds previously received have been met.  In cases  
beneficiaries that can’t be supported through Cash Assist or where the partner find that a cash transfer 
would not be effective or could even have a counterproductive effect , in-kind asset transfer will be th e 
appropriate delivery modality instead of cash.  
 
b) Timing 
Funding and transfers of productive assets should only take place after the completion of the preparatory 
stages which may include, targeting, entrepreneurship training or the SIYB training and business plan 
development among others. OA13 will not be used to build or maintain parallel skills-training infrastructure 
unless there is a documented absence of viable national options.  
The funding should be disbursed in tranches/ instalments to ensure proper management and project 
monitoring. The funding should also match the optimal time for the participants to succeed  at their 
enterprises. For example, for agro -business and value chain development, the funding should be aligned 
with the planting or harvesting season to avoid delays.  For employment this should either be for 6 or 12 
months.
Page 9 of 13 
 
c) Funding amount 
The partner and UNHCR should collaborate to allocate the funding for each activity in a way that maximizes 
the positive impact and minimizes the risk of underfunding or overfunding. Granting for micro enterprises 
can range from 100 USD to a max 12,000 USD for group/SME support  in line with business plan including 
RLOs promoting interventions in self -reliance and livelihood interventions.  The lower end (e.g. 100 –300 
USD) are only provided as part of an integrated graduation package, not as one‑off stand‑alone IGA support.  
 
For apprentice and wage employment the monthly incentive can range from 50 USD to a ma x of 300 
depending on the level of speciality and the job technical requirements . The daily casual labour wage rates 
can be adopted to the corresponding  categories (Unskilled, Semi -skilled and Skilled) in the  monthly South 
Sudan CCCM cluster daily labor wage rate.  
 
OA13 funding will prioritize multi -year, market -linked and scalable interventions (e.g. graduation 
programmes, value -chain integration, social protection linkages). Stand -alone, short -term, small -scale 
livelihood projects not embedded in a broader pathway to self-reliance will not be financed. 
 
d) Post-creation/intervention support  
 
a. Formalisation/business registration 
In collaboration with the UNHCR the livelihoods partner shall facilitate participant to formalise through legal 
registration. This could include  obtaining business registration, tax certificate and operational licenses or 
support for any other aspect related to compliance with the relevant labour and tax laws  
 
b. Business development assistance services 
The sector partner shall ensure that the participant has access to the range of business development 
assistance services necessary to maintain and improve the functioning of their activity. These services could 
be provided directly by the partner, or by referring the participant to a relevant private sector service 
provider. 
 
Business development assistance services include, among others, the following services:  
• Market access (market linkages, fairs, market information, networking with buyers, contract farming 
programmes.) 
• Access to inputs (linking with input suppliers, improving the capacity of input suppliers, creation of 
bulk buying groups.) 
• Access to infrastructure (storage, warehouses, cold chain, transport services, processing plants.)  
• Technology (ICT, technology for processing and storing products.) 
• Continuing education (technical, entrepreneurial skills, management, accounting.)  
• Financial services (access to bank accounts, credit, microfinance, fund transfer services, creation of 
tontines.) 
The business development assistance services required for a specific activity are to be determined during 
the development of the business plan and after the launch of the activity between the partner and the 
participant. 
c. Mentorship and Coaching 
In addition to monitoring, the partner will mentor the participant during the project life including: 
• Reinforcing the principles taught during training and initial supervision. 
• Linkages to financial service providers
Page 10 of 13 
 
• provide information on rights  and legal obligations pertaining to land use, wage labour, self -
employment, business registration, and training 
 
d. Actions to take in the event of shocks 
When the project context is characterized by climate shocks (flooding, bush fires) which impacts the ability 
to absorb, accommodate, adapt to, transform and recover from the effects of a hazard in a timely and 
efficient manner, support should be provided including through the identification of impacted households 
and stabilizing livelihoods and income opportunities through immediate social protection and employment 
measures available. Photos and a report will be made indicating the extent of damage. 
 
Accountability 
A validation committee made up of community leaders will play a critical role in safeguarding the integrity 
and effectiveness of livelihood assistance  including productive assets provided for  livelihoods support . 
Building on their position and local knowledge, the leaders  can serve as trusted persons to prevent fraud 
and ensure that the projects benefit the community. The committee oversees applicant selection, verifies 
residence in the camp  and witnesses the disbursement and use of funds, promoting transparency and 
compliance with project guidelines. The committee shall also take action on reported cases malpractice and 
overall accountability, to ensure that project  resources reach the intended recipients and contribute 
meaningfully to sustainable livelihoods. 
 
Graduation Approach of Implementation 
The graduation approach for livelihoods should involve implementing multiyear programmes with a 
structured and phased process as below to support identified individuals or households in achieving 
sustainable livelihoods and economic self -sufficiency. A cle ar graduation criterion is necessary to indicate 
when participants have achieved economic milestones and no longer require program support. Therefore, 
graduation benchmarks will be defined in terms of movement from Segment 1 –2 (most vulnerable and at 
risk of sliding into poverty ) towards Segment 3 –4 (market-integrated and economically active), with clear 
criteria on income, assets, savings and risk-management capacity. 
 
1. First it is necessary to identify and select participants based on the appropriate criteria and assess 
the participants aspirations in terms of assets skills and needs.  
2. A baseline assessment should be conducted to establish the starting point of participants' and to 
measure progress over time. The assessment can include income levels, asset ownership, household 
expenses, and other relevant indicators. 
3. The targeted individuals should receive tailored training to enhance their skills and knowledge in 
areas relevant to their chosen livelihood strategy.  
4. The participants should receive productive assets or inputs necessary to start or improve ongoing 
activities. (Such as agricultural inputs, livestock, tools and equipment, cash or materials for small 
businesses. 
5. Individuals/groups of participants should be assigned to mentors or coaches (project staff/model 
farmers/entrepreneurs) to work closely with for guidance, and technical assistance as they 
implement their livelihood plans. See Mentor Follow -Up Checklist.xlsx   tool for supporting 
mentorship follow-up visits. 
6. Participants should be facilitated to access to appropriate financial services such as savings schemes, 
accounts, credit/grants and financial literacy to help them develop financial management skills and
Page 11 of 13 
 
access financial products that support their activities. Encourage participants to diversify their 
livelihood activities to reduce risks and enhance resilience through value addition, and market 
linkages  
7. Targeted individuals enrolled in multiyear programmes shall be monitored for two to three years on 
a biannual basis to track progress, measure the impact of the graduation approach, and identify 
areas for improvement. This will determine if they have achie ved the set milestones to be 
considered for graduation from the livelihood programme. 
8. A transition/exit strategy that may include encourage participants to reinvest profits into their 
businesses or linking participants with local support networks, government services, or other 
community resources to ensure that participants can continue the ir livelihood activities 
independently after completing the program. (Please see detailed activity process  UNHCR 
Livelihood Graduation Programme steps.docx ) 
 
 
Coordination, Communication and Monitoring 
 
a) Coordination 
Bearing in mind the fact that livelihoods intervention is target and part of a larger package of protection 
assistance provided to refugees, it is the partner's responsibility to coordinate effectively for a smooth 
delivery. The Livelihood and economic inclusion working group will be the principal coordination mechanism 
for the livelihood interventions country wide. 
 
The partner will ensure that any intervention is well coordinated with the relevant line ministries (Labour, 
Finance, Social Development, Agriculture), regulators, and apex private sector bodies/chambers at local, and
Page 12 of 13 
 
national level. The partner's participation in the sessions of the livelihoods technical working group when 
they exist in the field will limit duplication risks and ensure the sector activities well-coordinated. 
 
The Livelihood and Economic Inclusion Working Group will coordinate closely with social protection and 
CBI fora to ensure harmonized targeting, transfer values and exit pathways between humanitarian 
programmes and national SP systems. 
 
b) Communication 
The partner  will maintain communication  and transparency with all stakeholders, including participants, 
other partners, authorities, and UNHCR. To the extent possible, the partner should inform and engage these 
other relevant stakeholders in the execution of the project. 
As part of the outreach and advocacy strategy of the e ntire project, the partner will participate in the 
collection of success stories, documentation of good practices, and lessons learned . The partner shall use 
UNHCR/donor visibility in all materials and project support related to UNHCR support to the beneficiary.  
 
c. Monitoring  
The partner and UNHCR should also conduct monitoring at 3 months, 6 months and 12 months to assess 
the effectiveness and accountability of any cash or material intervention provided to determine if they can 
progress on the pathway to self -reliance. Monitoring will also help to ensure that the support provided is 
used appropriately by both the partner and the participant.  Where feasible joint monitoring would be 
undertaken each month by the livelihoods technical working group to the project sites. 
 
The Core indicator  
Core Output  13.1.1 Number of people who benefitted from livelihoods and economic inclusion 
interventions (It includes individualised livelihood and economic inclusion support for agricultural 
production/livestock/fishery and inclusion in agrifood systems, graduation approach, self -employment and 
wage-employment, digital employment, as well as financial inclusi on. Interventions include provision of 
productive/financial assets (seed capital, inputs, fuel); accompaniment, formalisation and linkages to 
marketing options; agrifood processing and value addition; entrepreneurship training; technical and 
vocational education and training (TVET); support to skills certifications and/or diploma recognition; cash 
for livelihoods; as well as support to open bank accounts, access mobile money services or loans.) 
 
Transition/Exit Strategy and Sustainability 
A transition/exit strategy shall include encouraging participants to reinvest profits into their businesses or 
linking participants with local support networks, government services, or other community resources to 
ensure that participants can continue their livelihood activities independently after completing the program. 
Exit strategies will prioritize the transition from UNHCR ‑financed safety nets and livelihood top ‑ups to 
inclusion in national social protection systems, in line with UNHCR ’s Social Protection engagement 
framework. 
 
Exit strategies should be designed from the outset and regularly updated to ensure no harm during the 
phase-out of UNHCR -funded programmes, including by referring participants to alternative services and 
avoiding abrupt withdrawal of support . Where livelihood infrastructure and productive assets have been 
established (e.g. block farms, storage facilities, processing plants , market infrastructure), a clear handover 
plan to local authorities, community structures and refugee-led entities will be developed and documented.
Page 13 of 13 
 
 
The SOP will promote the formal registration and strengthening of refugee-led organizations and businesses 
to facilitate their direct participation in markets and in service delivery. 
 
Revisions to the SOP 
These Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) will be reviewed two years after the date of signature.  
 
 
 
 
-------------------------------------------------    
Signature 
 
Name: Mesfin DEGEFU, 
UNHCR Deputy Representative 
Representation Office, Juba, South Sudan 
Date: