Inter-agency 
Refugee 
Protection 
Overview 
Cross-regional Refugee Coordination 
Middle East Situation
June 2026
©UNHCR/Housam Hariri
RAFT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
03 Regional Overview
04 Common Cross-regional Emerging Protection Risks
05 Economic & Social Implications – from regional shocks to refugee protection outcomes
06 Key Messages — Protection Response & Preparedness
07 Resourcing Effective Protection Response & Adequate Preparedness
08
Protection Risk Trajectory by Country · 2025 → Post-28 Feb 202609
Cross-border Monitoring Summary
11 Iran — Protection Risks & Response
12 Lebanon — Protection Risks & Response
13 Syria — Protection Risks & Response
14 Afghanistan — Protection Risks & Response
15 Pakistan — Protection Risks & Response
16 Iraq — Protection Risks & Response
17 Türkiye — Protection Risks & Response
18 Armenia & Turkmenistan
19 Jordan, Egypt & Palestine Refugees — Wider Effects on Refugee Protection
20 Protection Coordination Fora
Timeframe: This document focuses on developments across the wider Middle East region between
28 February and 31 May 2026. Data related to population movement and response actions is
included up until 31 May, unless otherwise stated.
Geographic scope: This overview focuses on protection dynamics linked to the escalation of
hostilities in the Middle East since 28 February 2026. It does not seek to analyse all conflict
dynamics across the region in detail, including the situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territories,
which is covered under complementary processes (please see UNRWA and OCHA resources).
J U N E  2 0 2 6
22 Methodology and Coordination
J U N E  2 0 2 6
M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
Inter-agency Refugee Protection Overview 
Regional Overview
 AT A GLANCE 
Acute protection crises in conflict -affected contexts
including attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure. According to authorities,
3,375 people have been killed and 33,806 injured in Iran and 3,151 have been killed
and 9,571 injured in Lebanon (Government figs - WHO, 27 May). Significant ongoing
internal displacement, including of refugees, in Lebanon.
Intensified protection risks across the region
driven by economic shocks, legal insecurity and service degradation, even in the
absence of mass outward refugee movements. The situation affects over 31
million forcibly displaced people and recent returnees across the wider Middle
East region (incl. 5.9m Palestine refugees).
Returns under adverse circumstances
to Afghanistan and Syria, including of individuals that may still have international
protection needs, and to areas where reintegration capacity remains severely
constrained.
Heightened child protection, GBV and mental health risks
as the effects of displacement, insecurity, and service disruption intersect with pre-
existing vulnerabilities. 
Protection systems under growing strain
including legal, administrative, health and social protection services, with extra
barriers for refugees.
Underfunding of protection response
undermines the capacity for protection actors to support national protection systems
and meet the needs of vulnerable people (including GBV, CP and legal assistance and
other specialized protection services).
Socioeconomic pressures affecting States and protection outcomes
macroeconomic shocks are straining national systems and public services across the 
region, with significant implications for refugees and other vulnerable groups —
underscoring the need for inclusive, shock-resilient national systems. 
This Inter-Agency Refugee Protection Overview provides a cross-regional analysis of emerging protection risks and trends linked to the Middle
East Situation, drawing on country-level inter-agency protection analysis of developments since 28 February 2026, when renewed hostilities in
Iran and Lebanon triggered the current cross-regional escalation. The overview focuses on cross-regional protection dynamics that have resulted
from or been exacerbated by the situation, while recognising that these developments are occurring within a broader regional context shaped by
multiple, interconnect conflict situations. The document contains country summaries informed by Protection Working Groups or other relevant
protection coordination forums working to support refugees, asylum-seekers and affected host communities across the region. The document is
intended to support shared situational awareness, inform preparedness and further adjust responses, and help partners and decision-makers
to identify where displacement-related protection risks are intensifying, even in contexts where large-scale refugee movements have not
occurred. The overview also intends to highlight the central role of protection analysis and protection response needs and gaps in the current
situation to inform advocacy at multiple levels and mobilization of resources for protection activities in the region.
From a displacement perspective, the escalation has unfolded on top of an already overstretched regional baseline, with over 31 million forcibly
displaced people and recent returnees across the wider Middle East region before 28 February 2026 (including Palestine refugees under
UNRWA’s mandate). The current cross-regional protection environment is shaped by the convergence of multiple compounding factors that have
escalated in 2026 — including active conflict, erosion of International Humanitarian Law (IHL) and gender equality norms, macroeconomic decline
and underlying climate-related vulnerabilities — producing increasingly complex and multilayered protection risks that require integrated,
sustained inter-agency response.
The escalation of hostilities has contributed to acute protection crises in Iran and Lebanon, where conflict has directly resulted in large-scale
internal displacement (including of Syrian and Palestine refugees in Lebanon), loss of civilian lives and injuries, damage to civilian infrastructures
and contamination from explosive ordnance, disruption of basic services, and severe strain on legal, administrative and other national protection
systems. In these contexts, the crises have generated threats to life, to the safety, dignity and well-being of civilian populations, exacerbating risks
for children, women and girls, older persons and persons with disabilities. Monitoring has also revealed how – amidst displaced populations –
refugees and other undocumented foreigners face heightened exposure to protection risks linked to their legal status. This includes constraints in
obtaining or renewing personal documentation, often causing reduced freedom of movement and exposure to detention or deportation,
alongside loss of shelter and livelihoods, disrupted access to health, education and protection services. Women and girls are often
disproportionately affected, facing increased exposure to gender-based violence, increased caregiving responsibilities and barriers to accessing
assistance and recovery opportunities.
Aside from the acute crises in countries directly affected by hostilities, pressure is felt also across neighbouring countries and the wider region,
including in locations already hosting large displaced populations. Country-level analysis highlights growing risks for civilian populations, and
refugees in particular, driven by macroeconomic shocks affecting employment, household economies and national systems, degradation of public
services and infrastructure, legal insecurity, psychosocial distress due to the prolonged uncertainty, even in the absence of large new population
movements.
The socioeconomic implications of the situation are expected to be significant. Current projections suggest that the conflict could lead to uneven
development reversals globally, with as many as 32.5 million people pushed into poverty due to a combination of energy affordability and
availability challenges, rising food prices, and economic downturns (UNDP, 2026). This is happening at a time of significant reduction to funding
for humanitarian and development action, with continued shifts in national expenditure priorities likely to place additional constraints on social
spending. This is already curtailing operational actors' ability to contribute to protracted displacement response in support of national authorities,
as well as preparedness and emergency relief.
Returns under adverse circumstances, falling short of voluntary and dignified character and of sustainable conditions, are a central cross-regional
protection concern. Returns to Syria and Afghanistan (including deportations from Iran and Pakistan) are taking place in contexts where
reintegration capacity remains constrained. This can in turn derail fragile recovery efforts, overwhelm communities and generate new protection
concerns as well as new displacement or onward movements.
Taken together, these trends point to an overall protection environment under stress, with risks affecting populations unevenly across contexts,
deepening vulnerabilities, placing increasing strain on national institutions, and disrupting community-level protection and support mechanisms.
Ensuring flexible and sustained funding to protection actors remains essential to guarantee presence, preparedness and response capacities in
support to national authorities. As the situation has significant implications for broader national development trajectories, it underscores the need
to systematically link refugee protection considerations to national systems and development planning frameworks.
J U N E  2 0 2 6
4 C O M M O N  C R O S S- R E G I O N A L  E M E R G I N G  P R O T E C T I O N  R I S K S
Common protection risks are emerging across diverse country contexts impacted by the Middle East Situation, reflecting how the military escalation and its knock-on effects – including dire socioeconomic consequences - are interacting with
pre-existing vulnerabilities. These risks are shaping the overall protection situation and are present even in contexts where new forced displacement remains absent or limited. The themes below highlight how protection pressures are
manifesting in practice across countries of asylum, transit and return.
DIRECT CONFLICT-RELATED RISKS 
Attacks on Civilians and Civilian Objects
The escalation of hostilities in Iran and Lebanon has been characterized by high levels of violence against civilians, with
reported impacts on civilian infrastructure and populations also observed elsewhere in the region. Basic norms of International
Humanitarian Law have been contravened – including the use of explosive weapons in densely populated areas, inadequate
precautions to limit harm to civilians, forced displacement, and destruction of civilian infrastructure such as residential areas,
hospitals, schools, water and energy facilities. Hostilities have exacerbated civilian suffering and triggered forced movements
of the population, while the effects of military operations, the destruction of civilian objects and contamination by explosive
ordnance risk prolonging displacement.
Explosive ordnance (EO) - Even if people survive active hostilities, weapons contamination encountered during
displacement is a significant risk that causes death and injury, impacting safety and freedom of movement. High levels of
explosive ordnance and lack of timely clearance will hinder safe returns, most acutely in Syria and Lebanon, where
legacy contamination exists, but across all new areas affected by hostilities.
Forced Displacement
Forced displacement has been triggered by the escalation of hostilities, including in Lebanon, where it continues despite the
ceasefire and temporary relocation in Iran, where many people are likely now returning to their areas of habitual residence.
The situation remains fluid. This has compounded existing vulnerabilities and the risk of driving secondary
displacement. Border monitoring has been strengthened across contexts, recognizing that Iranian and Lebanese outflows may
include people in need of international protection.
Returns under Adverse Circumstances
Returns from Lebanon to Syria and from Iran and Pakistan to Afghanistan are taking place in contexts where conditions for
safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable return are not assured. Women and girls returning under adverse circumstances may
face heightened barriers to housing, civil documentation, livelihoods and access to services, including education, particularly in
countries such as Afghanistan, where they are facing systematic legal and institutionalized discrimination that effectively
excludes them from society. In all situations, female-headed households often experience increased economic and protection
risks during displacement and reintegration processes.
EXACERBATED PROTECTION AREAS
Gender-Based Violence
Gender-based violence risks are heightened by overcrowded or inadequate
shelter, restricted freedom of movement, loss of livelihoods triggering harmful
coping strategies.
The response is challenged by reduced access to safe and confidential services,
including those offered by national systems. This is evident in acute crisis settings
as well as other contexts affected by the situation, also as a result of the loss of
resources and dedicated funding.
Child Protection 
Child protection concerns include the killing and maiming of children, rising
psychological distress and increasing exposure to violence, involuntary family
separation, gender-based violence, including child marriage, as well as
increased child labour, and disrupted access to Best Interests Procedure, birth
registration and other child protection services — particularly in contexts of
repeated displacement or unstable return.
These risks are exacerbated by the weakening of national child protection
systems and disruption of essential services including education and health.
Mental Health & Psychosocial Distress 
Mental health conditions and psychological distress are increasing across all
contexts — driven by the direct and indirect effects of conflict, displacement and
loss of life, prolonged uncertainty, economic stress and deprivation. and
disruption of critical social and health services. Women and adolescent girls
experience heightened distress linked to exposure to violence, caregiving
responsibilities, family separation and uncertainty regarding return and recovery
prospects. Children are likely to require psychosocial support. Access to
appropriate MHPSS remains limited where health and social protection systems
are overstretched or disrupted.
STRUCTURAL & AGGRAVATED PROTECTION RISKS 
Impediments and/or Restrictions to Access to Legal Identity, Remedies and Justice
Loss, expiry or non-renewal of personal and asylum documentation has become a central protection concern, affecting
refugees, returnees and other displaced populations, especially as the regular function of public institutions and asylum
authorities have been disrupted. Documentation constraints undermine freedom of movement and access to basic services,
livelihoods and legal remedies, while contributing to fear or effective situations of arrest, detention or deportation.
Disruptions in the regular functioning of administrative and judicial authorities, including civil registries and courts, compound
delays in accessing documentation, therefore prolonging legal uncertainty — particularly in refugee-hosting and return
contexts — and increasing exclusion from assistance and consequent exposure to deprivation and exploitation.
Discrimination & stigmatization, denial of resources, opportunities, services and/or humanitarian access
The hostilities and broader crisis have a diverse impact across the population, driven by age, gender and other characteristics.
Older persons, persons with disabilities and other groups at risk of exclusion are recurrently identified as facing heightened
protection risks.
Mobility limitations, disruption of specialized health and social care, rising costs and reduced outreach disproportionately affect
marginalized groups, including LGBTIQ+ individuals, increasing isolation, dependency and the risk of targeted violence and
exploitation. In displacement and return settings, lack of accessible shelter due to affordability, physical or administrative
barriers, or lack if inclusive approaches, further erode dignified standards of living and aliment displacement-related risks.
ECONOMIC & SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS — FROM REGIONAL SHOCKS TO REFUGEE PROTECTION OUTCOMES
HOST CAPACITY & SERVICE EROSION RISING POVERTY LEVELS LOGISTICS & SUPPLY
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
The regional escalation is generating wide-ranging socioeconomic impact in and beyond directly affected conflict contexts, placing additional strain on States already managing protracted displacement situations.
Macroeconomic shocks — including rising energy and food prices, disrupted trade routes and fiscal pressures — negatively impact Governments’ ability to sustain public services, social protection systems and
inclusive policies. In this context, impacted labour markets, reduced institutional capacity and shifting national priorities (including social spending) are increasingly affecting access to services, legal status and
livelihoods for displaced populations. Disruption to internet access has curtailed jobs and services in some locations, affecting refugees and others’ direct access to information on available services and two-way
communication. As a result, existing vulnerabilities among refugee populations are deepening, with these socioeconomic pressures directly increasing protection risks.
This underscores the need for integrated humanitarian and development responses that reinforce national systems, safeguard inclusive access to services and ensure refugees are effectively integrated in responses
to socioeconomic shocks.
Host economies risk contracting due to energy price shocks. Fiscal
strain has driven subsidy cuts and administrative backlogs, for example
in Iran and Egypt, placing pressure on public institutions. Governments
face domestic pressure as humanitarian and development funding
decreased substantially including for refugee programming.
In Iran, state-provided services, including access to justice, healthcare
and other protection services, have been significant disrupted.
Protection partners’ programming has been adapted to community-
identified priorities of economic survival and service access.
In Egypt, the commercial closure directive, including work-from-home
measures, are delaying refugee registration. The cumulative effect risks
a chain of slower registration, residency renewals and asylum
determinations, leading to higher numbers of individuals with irregular
status and potential for heightened refoulement risk.
Up to 32.5 million people could be pushed into poverty globally
under UNDP’s highest-intensity disruption scenario due to the
triple shock: energy, food prices, GDP downturns (UNDP, April
2026). .In the Levant, poverty could rise by ~5 percentage points,
putting 2.85–3.30M people at risk — over three-quarters of the
Arab States regional total (UNDP, March 2026).
Global evidence shows that refugees are consistently poorer than
host populations and experience deeper levels of deprivation.
Given limited assets, restricted access to employment and weaker
coping mechanisms, this makes refugee households particularly
vulnerable to economic shocks, with rising costs expected to have
a disproportionate impact on their ability to meet basic needs.
The situation has had widespread impact on markets and supply
chains are contributing to rising costs across countries – likely to
disproportionately affect the most vulnerable over time.
Humanitarian logistical hubs faced shipping disruptions, rising
freight/insurance costs, and vessel rerouting, delaying emergency
supply. These pressures are compounded by broader humanitarian
funding contraction, rising operational costs and growing needs.
OCHA and the UN Secretary-General have identified contracting
global humanitarian funding as the principal constraint on the
2026 response.
Core drivers of risks to social cohesion linked to the situation include resource competition,
unequal service access, and misinformation fuelling exclusion and inter-communal tension
across Lebanon, Türkiye, Pakistan and Syria. Examples include - Lebanon: IDP-host community
tensions reported alongside refugee-related antagonism. Syria: tensions in areas of return
escalating over scarce housing, employment and infrastructure.
Integrating displaced populations into national development planning remains essential –
including evidence-based adjustments to service provision in times of crisis - alongside ensuring
that conflict-sensitive approaches are embedded at the heart of emergency response.
The current escalation underscores close interlinkages between food security, system capacity
and protection outcomes. Reduction in assistance, disruptions to access, and pressure on
national systems are contributing to rapid deterioration in food security alongside heightened
protection risks. WFP analysis: up to 45 million additional people globally — including over 5
million in MENA — could face acute hunger if current pressures persist. FAO analysis also
indicates that rising energy and fertilizer costs are likely to increase food price volatility and
place additional strain on vulnerable populations. WFP has already reduced assistance to 1.5M
people globally; risk of increasing to 9M should elevated costs persist. Returns under adverse
circumstances combined with increasing pressure on host systems risk secondary vulnerability
and onward movement without sustained support (WFP).
CROSS-CUTTING RISK: SOCIAL COHESION
J U N E  2 0 2 6
5
FOOD SECURITY
6 K E Y  M E S S A G E S  — P R O T E C T I O N  R E S P O N S E  &  P R E P A R E D N E S S
The protection risks and trends generated by the Middle East Situation give rise to important cross-regional implications for protection, asylum space and response capacity. These implications stem from acute protection crises in Iran and 
Lebanon, refugee return under adverse circumstances in Syria and Afghanistan, and the cumulative effects of economic pressure , service degradation, constrained mobility and conditions for refugees across multiple contexts. These messages are 
for use in dialogue with response actors and Governments.
Maintain access to territory, asylum space 
and protection safeguards
Respect for access to territory, and to fair
asylum procedures and protection safeguards
remains essential across the region,
irrespective of the scale or visibility of
population movements. Restrictions on access
to territory, to fair asylum procedures,
restrictive policies and administrative
procedures limiting registration and
documentation are increasing protection risks
for people in need of international protection,
including exposure to detention, family
separation, involuntary and undignified return
and risk of onward movement under unsafe
conditions.
Continuous adherence to the principle of non-
refoulement, together with protection-sensitive
border management and guaranteed access to
fair individual asylum procedures are
indispensable to upholding international
protection obligations and safeguarding asylum
space.
Provide life-saving assistance for refugees 
who return under adverse circumstances 
and facilitate reintegration
Returns of refugees under adverse
circumstances have emerged as a defining
cross-regional protection concern, including
movements from Lebanon to Syria and from
Iran and Pakistan to Afghanistan. These
returns are occurring in contexts where
conditions for safe, voluntary, dignified and
sustainable return are not met, and where
reintegration capacity remains limited.
It is essential that returns are genuinely
voluntary, and not driven by pressure,
deprivation or insecurity.
Adequate support to sustainable
reintegration is essential. Without it,
alongside sustained access to services and
robust protection safeguards, including mine
action, returns risk generating new protection
concerns, undermining social cohesion and
increasing the likelihood of secondary
displacement and onward movement.
Reinforce and adequately resource 
inclusive national protection systems 
alongside targeted protection interventions 
to mitigate risk
Protection interventions are critical across all
contexts — including legal assistance, civil
documentation, child protection and GBV
response, mental health and psychosocial
support, specialized assistance for older
persons, persons with disabilities and others at
risk of exclusion. Inclusive and shock-resilient
national systems are essential to mitigate
socioeconomic drivers of protection risk.
As economic pressure and service degradation
intensify (including the displacement of some of
the service providers themselves), diminishing
coverage, accessibility, affordability and quality
of protection services is often associated with
increased exposure to violence, exploitation and
harmful coping strategies. This is particularly
the case for children, women and persons with
specific unmet needs. Sustaining protection
capacity at national, local, and community
levels, including by supporting refugee-led and
women-led organizations, is central to
mitigating protection risks, avoiding exclusion
and preventing further displacement. This
should be done in alignment with national plans
and structures where possible.
Respect the protection of civilians to 
reduce loss of life, human suffering, 
mitigate displacement, and facilitate return 
and recovery
The protection of civilians remains a
fundamental obligation of parties to the
conflict, grounded in International
Humanitarian Law and the moral principle of
humanity. Disregard for these principles has
directly resulted in unnecessary harm,
including civilian casualties.
Where IHL is respected, civilian harm is
reduced, essential infrastructure and
services necessary to the population are
preserved, and humanitarian actors are
better able to operate. Lack of respect for
IHL —including indiscriminate attacks,
insufficient precaution in military operations,
destruction of homes and attacks on objects
indispensable to survival— are among the
primary drivers of displacement.
Compliance with IHL would significantly
reduce displacement, within countries and
across borders. It will also be essential to
avoid that displacement becomes
protracted, and returns are voluntary and
more sustainable.
J U N E  2 0 2 6
7 R E S O U R C I N G  E F F E C T I V E  P R O T E C T I O N  R E S P O N S E  &  A D E Q U A T E  P R E P A R E D N E S S
K E Y  M E S S A G E
Support required for protection response and protection-centred preparedness, including through strengthened national systems
The current context underscores the need for protection-centred preparedness and response approaches that can adapt to evolving risks, including in countries where new refugee flows remain constrained, but
protection needs are escalating as a result of the wider implications of the situation. Timely, flexible and predictable resourcing is required to sustain protection services, reinforce reintegration capacity in areas of
return and enable rapid scale-up of emergency protection interventions where conditions deteriorate. This includes sustaining emergency protection delivery, including cash and in-kind assistance, alongside
engagement to strengthen inclusive national social protection systems. Governments’ prioritization of inclusive shock-resilient national protection systems remains imperative. Constrained humanitarian and
development funding - alongside fiscal pressure on host countries - risks accelerating protection erosion if not addressed proactively.
K E Y  P R O T E C T I O N  F U N D I N G  P R I O R I T I E S  I D E N T I F I E D  B Y  C O U N T R Y- L E V E L  P R O T E C T I O N  C O O R D I N A T I O N  F O R U M S   
Iran
Scale up flexible cash and in-kind assistance for the
most vulnerable Afghan households to bridge the
loss of livelihoods while advocating for recovery
measures.
Sustain individualised protection responses — legal
counselling, MHPSS and partner referrals —
alongside timely communication with communities.
Advocate for extension of documentation, with
tailored support for the most vulnerable individuals.
Lebanon Syria
Scale up protection monitoring and response capacities,
including MHPSS, GBV and child protection services,
legal assistance, and mine action, to address emerging
return-related risks and support vulnerable populations.
Strengthen community-based protection mechanisms,
including dispute resolution and social cohesion
initiatives, in areas experiencing high levels of return.
Invest in national and local systems that underpin
solutions, including social protection, legislative and
policy reforms, and institutional capacity to effectively
respond to the needs of returnees and vulnerable
communities.
Afghanistan
Pakistan Iraq
Support government-led protection services — MHPSS,
child protection and services for survivors of gender-
based violence — given overstretched capacity.
Strengthen government registration capacity to ensure
timely registration and issuance of documentation for
new refugee and asylum-seeker arrivals as well as
enhance access to birth registration and civil
documentation.
cash assistance for vulnerable refugees and asylum
seekers, whose needs have intensified due to the
regional socio-economic situation.
Türkiye Armenia
Restore and sustain community-based protection
services, including outreach, legal assistance and case
management, including to address refoulement and
barriers to access in hard-to-reach areas.
Scale up protection activities, including monitoring,
GBV services, psychosocial support and child
protection, as access constraints intensify.
Expand protection cash assistance and
community-based support to address rising
vulnerabilities and harmful coping mechanisms.
Prevention and response services are severely
underfunded, leaving critical gaps in life-saving support
and sustained service provision.
Protection emergency and recurrent cash assistance
for highly vulnerable families prevents harm and
stabilizes those most at risk.
Safe spaces, community centers and child-friendly
spaces provide group MHPSS, including community
based physio-social support (CBPSS).
Protection staffing is insufficient to deliver prioritized
protection activities.
Support expansion and readiness of temporary
reception and accommodation to enhance national
preparedness capacity.
Support mobile registration arrangements, technical
equipment, interpretation services and preparedness
to enable timely registration and processing if required.
Provide flexible short-term assistance, including
cash-based support, for vulnerable individuals and
families when reception capacities face temporary
pressure.
Scale up returnee cash and immediate protection
responses at border points to address urgent needs,
reduce exposure to protection risks and support safe
onward movement.
Sustain comprehensive protection services for
individuals at heightened risk,
including protection case management, MHPSS, GBV
and child protection services.
Facilitate timely access to civil documentation for
vulnerable returnees facing barriers to legal identity.
Support national capacity to access asylum procedures
for those seeking international protection;
Support government-led protection services and
preparedness actions. Ensure operational readiness of
existing systems, including preparedness for stock
prepositioning, warehousing arrangements, preparation
for scaled-up case management and targeted assistance,
should the government request support in case of large
movements. Sustain communication with communities
and CBOs to monitor concerns, information needs and
emerging protection risks.
J U N E  2 0 2 6
8 C R O S S- B O R D E R  M O N I T O R I N G  S U M M A R Y
BORDER CROSSING STATUS 
Official border-crossing status across the Middle East situation. Source: UNHCR, May 2026.
BORDERS STATUS KEY HIGHLIGHTS
Lebanon -Syria OPEN
Iran - Türkiye OPEN
Between 3 March and 21 May, more than 286,000 Iranians arrived in Türkiye while 253,000 Iranian
nationals returned to Iran. Entries continue predominantly under the visa exemption regime. These
movements continue to largely reflet routine mobility rather than large scale displacement Some
individuals have indicated an intention to seek international protection, reporting that their decision
to cross was taken following recent developments in Iran. Based on monitoring conducted by
UNHCR, movements, on both sides, continue predominantly as families.
Iran - Afghanistan OPEN
Iran - Pakistan
Around 13,700 Iranians crossed to Pakistan between (1 Mar-28 May) movements occurred
primarily through Taftan–Mirjaveh BCP and Gabd–Kumb–Rimdan BCP individuals, many travellers
are crossing for trade-related or family reasons. Border authorities reported no influx of Iranian
nationals other than those with valid passports and visas in Pakistan (UNHCR-IOM Pakistan Joint
border monitoring report).
Iran - Iraq OPEN
Border conditions remained broadly stable with all crossing points remaining open and no major
new restrictions reported. Incoming movements of Iranian nationals were driven primarily by family
visits (43%), employment (33%), and tourism (12%), with no movements reported as conflict or
insecurity related during the period. No BCPs reported emergency response or security incidents
during the reporting period (IOM, Mobility Report: 28 May 2026) while UNHCR records small
numbers of Iranians arriving due to escalating hostilities.
OPEN
Observed movements remain predominantly routine and commercial in nature. Current trends do
not indicate large-scale displacement movements or significant changes in the protection
environment. crossings remain broadly balanced, indicating continued regular two-way movements,
without a significant surge in arrivals.
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
Iran - Armenia
Among over 444,000 Syrian returnees who crossed into Syria between 2 March and 31 May,
109,792 indicated (at the borders) their intention to remain permanently. Return of Syrians from
Lebanon surged in March, tripling the monthly average observed since November 2025, before
normalizing to baseline levels in April and May. Crossings of Lebanese refugees from Lebanon to
Syria remained relatively similar between March and April (30,000 per month). However, this
increased in May to over 45,000 (UNHCR and government of Syria).
PARTIALLY  
OPEN
Despite the conflict, protection monitoring in Iran suggests that Afghans prefer to remain in Iran.
193,800 have returned 28 Feb –31 May; 40% below same period 2025 (peak for returns from Iran
was July 2025). Returns largely involuntary. Return data is jointly validated by UNHCR and IOM
and aligned under Afghanistan RC’s Office.
Iran - Turkmenistan OPEN
Turkmenistan shares an extensive 1,148 km border with Iran. No major changes to the protection
environment have been observed in the country since the start of the regional escalation. Since
February 2026, safe transit of third-country nationals has been facilitated by the government
through its borders as a "humanitarian corridor”.
J U N E  2 0 2 6
PROTECTION RISK TRAJECTORY BY COUNTRY · 2025 → POST-28 FEB 2026
Country 2025 Baseline Conditions Post-28 Feb 2026 Key Protection Developments Key Additional Data Points
Iran ~2M+ Afghans returned in 2025; mass deportations; documentation &
employment crises
3,375 civilian deaths; loss of jobs during difficult economic situation and increased overall costs
of living; school enrolment for next school year resumed for documented children only
193,800 Afghans returned 28 Feb–31 May
2026; 40% below same period 2025
Lebanon
Post-Nov 2024 ceasefire; return intentions of Syrian refugees surged
(Flash RPIS: 24% intent 12mo); extreme socio-economic distress (VASyR
2024)
Renewed hostilities 2 Mar; 1M+ displaced; 585,000+ crossed to Syria (incl. 444,400 Syrians,
74,000 Lebanese, 1,200+ PRS); 90% refugees outside official shelters; GBV acute;
documentation loss
3,151 deaths (incl. 97 Syrian refugees of
whom 24 are children); 9,571 injuries
Syria
1.6M refugee + over 1.3M Syrians returned from countries of Asylum + 
1.7M IDP returns since Dec 2024; 40% households report MHPSS 
needs; 34% cannot access services; HLP, high levels of unexploded 
ordnance, documentation gaps
585,000 additional crossings from Lebanon (Syrians (80%), Lebanese refugees (19.7%) and
Palestine refugees (0.3%) crossed into Syria (31 May); regional instability affecting perceptions
of safety; social cohesion pressures intensifying; civil documentation systems strained
1 in 6 families newly arrived from Lebanon
lacking key documents; 52% of refugee
returnees are women and girls
Afghanistan 2.9M returned in 2025; GDP per capita fell 4% (WB); stagnant
livelihoods; increasing household debt; worsening food/shelter security
487.5K Afghans (28 Feb 2026- 31 May 2026); reception capacity overwhelmed; border
closures at Torkham & Spin Boldak; reintegration infrastructure in crisis
754K+ returns in first 5 months of 2026 vs.
2.9M in full year 2025; 5.4M+ total since Oct
2023
Pakistan
1M+ returned 2025 (154,600 deported); 54 refugee villages are no
longer approved by the government to be inhabited by refugees/de-
notified; climate of fear; GBV and child labour rising
293K+ Afghans returned 28 Feb–31 May 2026; 26 of 54 refugee villages vacated; Iran influx
preparedness in place
Torkham & Azakhel VRC are open; 16,000+
Afghans processed at Voluntary Repatriation
Centers in May 2026
Türkiye 2.3M+ Syrians; post-earthquake recovery ongoing; increasing social
and economic pressure
286K Iranians crossed (visa-exempt); 253 returned (as of 21 May); ; Afghan MHPSS stress from
Iran situation; 667,565 voluntary Syria returns since Dec 2024
32.37% annual inflation Apr 2026 (partly fuel
costs from regional instability)
Iraq 350,433 refugees & asylum seekers; Syrian return intent lowest in the
region at 2%; protracted IDP situation
8,926 Iranian refugees and asylum-seekers registered; Iranian settlements in Kurdistan Region
of Iraq repeatedly attacked leading to relocation of residents; Strait of Hormuz blockade drove
inflation; inter-agency contingency plan finalised
Oil production fell ~70%; IQD-USD
fluctuated ±20%; economic shocks
deepening vulnerability across Iraq
Armenia 600 asylum applications in 2025; 170 in Q1 2026; sole reception centre
at full capacity (60 beds); government cash support insufficient
16 Iranian asylum apps 28 Feb–5 May; near-equal entry/exit (18,270/17,515); no mass influx;
UNHCR scaled border monitoring; GoE RSD office being established
USD ~55/month family head (government
cash support); insufficient to cover basic
needs
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
This table summarises baseline protection conditions in 2025 and key developments since the onset of the Middle East Situatio n on 28 February 2026 across eight countries. Country-specific protection risks, response highlights, and 
operational priorities are elaborated in the country pages that follow.
J U N E  2 0 2 6
9
Country 
Summaries: 
Protection 
Risks & 
Response
0 7  /  1 6I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
UNHCR, Displaced family in Beirut, Lebanon, March 2026
11 I R A N  — P R O T E C T I O N  R I S K S  &  R E S P O N S E
1.65M
Refugees and others in need of international protection (Iran Flash RRP)
1M
Host community and 0.15M Afghans of other status targeted in Flash RRP
150,800+
People reached through Protection interventions
PRIORITY ANALYSIS & PROTECTION RISKS
During the hostilities, a total of 3,375 civilian fatalities were recorded as of 5 May (Iranian Ministry of Health). The
destruction of civilian infrastructures and essential services, including hospitals, schools and emergency facilities
reduced basic living conditions. Temporary relocation within the country was driven by the hostilities and
extensive damage to homes: as of 29 April, IOM estimated 400,000 people, including Afghans, had seen their
homes directly affected, with the government reporting more than 120,000 residential units damaged or
destroyed. WHO reported 26 attacks on health facilities since 28 February, killing 11 health workers. According to
the Ministry of Education, strikes on educational infrastructure have killed 245 students and 58 education
personnel and injured a further 178 students and 24 staff. The security crisis in March and April exacerbated the
protection situation of Afghans in Iran. Between 28 February and 30 May, more than 193,800 Afghans returned
from Iran - 40% below the same period in 2025 (the peak for returns from Iran was July 2025) - amid reports of
increased anxiety due to the security and economic situation, with greater impact on vulnerable individuals. This
shows that, despite the hostilities, Afghan nationals prefer to remain in Iran.
Since May, reports have identified inflation, unemployment, loss of daily wage labour, rising rent and health costs
and documentation-related expenses as the main drivers of household vulnerability. The legal and documentation
environment also remains a source of anxiety particularly due to the documentation renewal process, among
Afghan households unable to meet the new financial and administrative requirements. Households increasingly
reported negative coping mechanisms, including selling assets, accumulating debt and child labour. Rising rent and
landlord pressure increased eviction risks. Communities continued to report requiring urgent support to meet
basic needs and maintain access to legal stay, health care, education and protection services. Children are among
the most severely affected: school disruption across at least 14 provinces, exposure to the insecurity and
heightened household stress, including family separation, are increasing the psychosocial distress.
.
Persons with disabilities face disrupted access to specialized care. State-provided GBV services — including access
to justice, health care, and other life-saving services — have been significantly disrupted. Mental health and
psychosocial support are among the most frequently reported community needs, with anxiety the most common
presenting symptom. Communities consistently identify remaining in Iran as the preferred option, viewing return
to Afghanistan, or onward movement, as unfeasible in current settings.
PROTECTION RESPONSE 
Protection responses have been adapted to community-identified priorities of economic survival,
service access and mental health. Protection partners maintained an operational presence across its main locations
in Iran, enabling continued identification of the most vulnerable people, counselling, legal aid, documentation-
related support, emergency cash assistance and psychosocial support despite a challenging operating environment.
Emergency cash assistance has been scaled up, alongside provision of Universal Public Health Insurance support
targeting 75,000 vulnerable individuals in 2026. Resettlement departures of 195 individuals were suspended Mar–
May 2026 due to conflict.
C O U N T R Y- S P E C I F I C  
A D V O C A C Y  &  
O P E R A T I O N A L  
P R I O R I T I E S
Scale up flexible cash and in-kind assistance for the
most vulnerable Afghan households to bridge the loss
of livelihoods while advocating for recovery measures.
Sustain individual protection responses including legal
counselling, MHPSS services and referral to partners
and continuous and timely communication with
communities.
Advocacy for extension of documentation with
tailored support for the most vulnerable individuals.
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
J U N E  2 0 2 6
Women at risk, female-headed households and older persons face increased isolation, movement restrictions and
loss of livelihoods, raising exposure to exploitation and triggering harmful coping responses. Persons with
disabilities face disrupted access to specialized care. State-provided GBV services — including access to justice,
health care, and other life-saving services — have been sustained while significantly disrupted. Mental health and
psychosocial support are among the most frequently reported community needs, with anxiety being the most
common presenting symptom. Communities consistently identify remaining in Iran as the preferred option,
viewing return to Afghanistan, or onward movement, as unfeasible in the current setting.
12 L E B A N O N  — P R O T E C T I O N  R I S K S  &  R E S P O N S E
1M+
Internally displaced since 2 March 2026 (MoSA) and over 1.4M in need
225,900+
Reached by Protection Sector (30 May)
585,000+
PRIORITY ANALYSIS & PROTECTION RISKS
From the signing of the November 2024 cessation of hostilities declaration until the eruption of renewed hostilities on 2 March
2026, UNIFIL recorded more than 15,000 ceasefire violations committed by Israel in Lebanon. The escalation of hostilities in
March resulted in the rapid displacement of over one million people. Despite the ceasefire announcement on 17 April,
continued military activity by Israel and non-state armed actors has led to further displacement, casualties and destruction: the
death toll as of 27 May stands at 3,151 (including 97 Syrian refugees, of whom 24 are children) and 9,571 injuries (including
130 Syrian refugees, of whom 24 are children).
Many non-Lebanese — notably refugees and migrants — were unable to access collective shelters despite government
assurances. Persistent barriers linked increased administrative measures, non-inclusive practices, and documentation
requirements, while those within shelters faced severe overcrowding, inadequate hygiene and lack of privacy, with heightened
risks for women and girls, persons with disabilities, older persons and children. Of identified displaced refugees, 10 per cent
lack any safe accommodation, 40 per cent rent accommodation, and another 40 per cent are hosted by friends or family. Those
cumulative 90 per cent of refugees outside of official collective shelters face harsh weather, exposure to exploitation,
harassment and limited access to services. Women and girls, including refugee, migrant and returnee populations, face
heightened protection risks in overcrowded shelters and informal accommodation arrangements. Limited privacy, safety
concerns and reduced access to essential services increase exposure to gender-based violence, including sexual harassment,
exploitation and intimate partner violence. Women with disabilities, older women and female-headed households face
additional barriers to accessing assistance and protection services. Additionally, more than 1,000 refugees have reported being
unable to leave conflict-affected areas, with access to healthcare and essential services severely constrained.
The escalation of the conflict has exacerbated pre-existing gender inequalities and generated disproportionate protection risks
for women and girls across affected populations. This resulted in large-scale cross-border movements to Syria considered
return under force majeure. Since the start of the escalation and as of 31 May, according to Syrian authorities, over 585,000
Syrians (around 80%), Lebanese refugees (19.7%), and Palestine refugees(0.3%) had crossed into Syria.
PROTECTION RESPONSE 
The Protection Sector developed a prioritised package of life-saving interventions, including: Protection monitoring and analysis
leading to enhanced protection mainstreaming; community engagement and mobilization; awareness and information sessions
coupled with provision of protection-specific in-kind support; targeted outreach and identification of people at heightened
risk, linking them to case management programs and cash assistance and specialized programs addressing needs and care services
for unaccompanied/separated children, persons with disabilities and others at heightened risk. As of 12 May, the Sector has
reached over 184,000 people through 77 partners. Women-led and community-based organizations continue to play a critical
frontline role in providing referrals, psychosocial support, protection services and humanitarian assistance despite severe funding
constraints and increased operational pressures. This includes 84,000 people reached with information, 66,000 with CP/GBV/PRT
case management and MHPSS, 24,000 dignity kits distributed, and 1,796 households supported with emergency cash, with
coverage extended to 87% of collective shelters. In parallel, over 12,000 Syrian refugees received counselling and a one-time USD
100 cash grant, with UNHCR introducing the Return under Force Majeure (RFM) modality to support those compelled to return
due to lack of alternatives.
C O U N T R Y- S P E C I F I C  
A D V O C A C Y  &  
O P E R A T I O N A L  
P R I O R I T I E S
Scale up funding for protection and linked
shelter activities, particularly GBV, child
protection, MHPSS and disability support,
including protection mainstreaming in shelters
Ensure returns to Syria must be safe,
voluntary, dignified and sustainable
and sustain funding for existing
programs
Maintain access to territory,
ensure protection, non
refoulment and basic services;
Support populations unable to
return
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
GBV risks — including sexual assault and intimate partner violence — have been elevated across collective shelters and in host
communities, with women and girls with disabilities, female-headed households, as well as refugee and migrant women facing
particularly acute exposure to physical violence, sexual exploitation and coercion. Repeated displacement, economic insecurity,
caregiving burdens and uncertainty regarding return prospects are also contributing to heightened psychosocial distress among
women and girls. Children show high-levels of psychological distress due to displacement conditions, family separation, child
labour and learning disruption. Repeated displacement cycles have caused systemic documentation loss — reducing households'
ability to re-establish legal identity and exercise housing, land and property rights — with displaced Syrians disproportionately
exposed to detention and deportation risk. Unequal access, resentment and misinformation have intensified intra and inter-
communal tensions, which have led to exclusion and sporadic exposure to violence for refugees.
Address protracted internal
displacement through national
solutions (housing, livelihoods,
preparedness)
Syrians (80%), Lebanese refugees (19.7%) and Palestine refugees (0.3%) 
crossed into Syria (31 May)
J U N E  2 0 2 6
13 S Y R I A  — P R O T E C T I O N  R I S K S  &  R E S P O N S E
1.6M+
Refugee returns since December 2024
585,000+
Syrians (80%), Lebanese refugees (19.7%) and Palestine refugees (0.3%) 
crossed into Syria (31 May)
955,000+
Reached with protection interventions (30 April)
PRIORITY ANALYSIS & PROTECTION RISKS
Since December 2024, Syria has witnessed large-scale return movements, with more than 1.6 million refugees and
1.9 million IDPs returning to their areas of origin. Women and girls account for approximately 52 per cent of
refugee returnees, while children represent 58 per cent. Since the start of the escalation and as of 31 May 2026,
over 585,000 Syrians, Lebanese nationals, and Palestine refugees had crossed into Syria, often driven by the
escalation of hostilities in Lebanon, around 49 per cent of Syrian were females, with 25 per cent of the total
Syrians returns expressing an intention to remain permanently. These returns are taking place amid continued
humanitarian and protection challenges, with an estimated 15.6 million people requiring humanitarian assistance
across sectors in 2026.
At the same time, the protection environment remains fragile and continues to be shaped by the cumulative
impacts of years of conflict, including widespread destruction of infrastructure, economic hardship, and limited
access to essential services. An estimated 5.5 million people remain displaced within Syria, while millions continue
to face risks associated with explosive ordnance contamination, gender-based violence, child protection concerns,
psychosocial distress, and barriers to accessing civil documentation, housing, land and property rights, and justice
services. The scale of return movements has also increased pressure on host and return communities, placing
additional strain on housing, basic services, and livelihood opportunities, while exacerbating social cohesion
challenges in areas of return. These pressures are compounded by overlapping unmet needs—including food,
shelter, employment, healthcare, and psychosocial support—which continue to constrain prospects for sustainable
reintegration. Returns from Lebanon have been characterized by rapid and often uncertain movements, with
patters of women and children returning alone, and many of whom have experienced heightened levels of
psychosocial distress. These factors have increased vulnerabilities and protection risks during transit and upon
return, underscoring the need for sustained support to facilitate safe, dignified, and sustainable reintegration.
PROTECTION RESPONSE 
Authorities have continued to uphold access to territory. Protection partners under the umbrella of the Protection
Sector have been strengthening their responses through an integrated package of services, complemented by
enhanced border and community-based monitoring and response. At the border, the inter-agency response carried
out jointly with the authorities, ensures provision of transportation assistance, core relief items, water, food, legal
counselling on civil and HLP documentation, as well as information on available services in areas of destination to
facilitate timely access to support upon arrival. In country, over 150 protection partners have together reached
more than 955,000 people, including returnees, with protection services of 30 April through the sector’s network of
community centres, mobile teams and outreach volunteers. The response includes protection interventions through
community centres, such as legal assistance and GBV, Child Protection and MHPSS case management. Cash
assistance and essential relief items have also been prioritised for the most vulnerable.
C O U N T R Y- S P E C I F I C  
A D V O C A C Y  &  
O P E R A T I O N A L  
P R I O R I T I E S
Invest in strengthening governance and protection 
systems, including social protection and referral 
mechanisms
Strengthen the legal and institutional framework for 
durable solutions by supporting reforms on legal 
identity
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
As return movements continue to expand in scale and geographic reach, protection needs are increasing
accordingly, underscoring the importance of strengthened protection monitoring and response capacities,
including MHPSS, GBV and child protection services, legal assistance, and mine action. Addressing barriers to
housing, documentation, livelihoods, and essential services, while strengthening national and local systems, will be
critical to supporting sustainable reintegration and longer-term recovery.
J U N E  2 0 2 6
A F G H A N I S T A N  — P R O T E C T I O N  R I S K S  &  R E S P O N S E
6 million+
Returns (including deportations) from Iran & Pakistan (Sept. 2023 until - May
2026)
754,100
Returns (including deportations) from Iran and Pakistan in 2026 (Jan-31 May 
2026)
200,100 
Returnees assisted with protection interventions in areas of return in 2026 
(Jan-30 April 2026)
PRIORITY ANALYSIS & PROTECTION RISKS 
The Refugee Coordination Model has not been activated in Afghanistan; however, the Afghanistan Protection
Coordination Group, co-coordinated by UNHCR and NRC, brings together protection partners to identify
protection risks and ensure coordinated responses at national and sub-national levels. While Afghanistan has not
experienced direct attacks on civilians or civilian infrastructure linked to the hostilities involving Iran, Israel and the
United States since February 2026, more than four million Afghans in Iran have been directly or indirectly
affected. The resulting large-scale forced returns, restrictive mobility policies and shrinking protection space in
Iran have significantly compounded pressures linked to ongoing returns of Afghanistan from Pakistan, cross-
border clashes and pre-existing humanitarian, socio-economic and human rights challenges. In 2026 alone, more
than 751,000 Afghans have returned from Iran and Pakistan including many who held valid refugee status and
documentation (IOM and UNHCR). Returns have been largely involuntary and at a scale exceeding reception and
reintegration capacity, contributing to secondary displacement, family separation, loss of assets and harmful
coping strategies. Large-scale returns are also compounding pre-existing protection risks within an already fragile
humanitarian and human-rights context shaped by systemic discrimination against women and girls and other
vulnerable groups, further complicated by a stagnant economy, widespread poverty, the collapse of basic public
services and frequent natural disasters. UNHCR’s Post-Returnee Monitoring Report indicates persistently weak -
and in several sectors worsening - reintegration outcomes exacerbating protection risks: livelihoods remain
stagnant, household debt has increased, food security has declined, and shelter insecurity has grown. Without
scaled-up livelihoods, shelter, protection and legal assistance, and with 2.6 million returns anticipated between
April-December 2026, reintegration will be further undermined and protection risks will increase for both
returnees and host communities. Many returnees lack civil documentation, limiting access to services, livelihoods,
freedom of movement and property rights. Psychological and emotional distress is widely reported among
returnees across all corridors, linked to physical violence, prolonged detention and family separation before and
during return (IOM; and UNHCR 2025 Protection Monitoring data).
PROTECTION RESPONSE 
Protection partners continue delivering life-saving services at border and return areas, including protection
monitoring and counselling, protection screening and referrals, child protection and GBV case management, safe
spaces and services, family tracing and reunification, MHPSS, mine awareness and clearance, and community-based
protection interventions. As of the end of April 2026, 200,100 returnees have received protection interventions in
their areas of return. Of this total, 48 per cent were female, 58 per cent were children, and 16 per cent were persons
with disabilities. The broader humanitarian response provides integrated support to returnees and displaced
households through multipurpose cash, health care, emergency shelter, food, education and civil documentation
assistance. Inter-agency contingency planning through the Inter-cluster Coordination Team and Border Consortium
addresses return scenarios from Iran and renewed Afghanistan–Pakistan hostilities. Additionally, integrated planning
with durable solutions actors ensures nexus linkages between humanitarian and early recovery interventions. Despite
sustained efforts, protection response capacity remains insufficient given the scale and complexity of needs,
especially considering the multifaceted protection crisis in the country.
C O U N T R Y- S P E C I F I C  
A D V O C A C Y  &  
O P E R A T I O N A L  
P R I O R I T I E S
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
14
Women, girls, children, older persons and persons with disabilities face heightened protection risks - including GBV,
child labour and explosive ordnance exposure in border areas - compounded by the severe restrictions of women
and girls’ human rights, including the ban on girls' education above sixth grade, restrictions of movement, work and
participation in public life, also limiting participation of national female staff in the humanitarian response. Cross-
border movements have been repeatedly disrupted by insecurity, border closures, and damaged infrastructure,
cutting off tens of thousands from assistance and protection services. Returnees and deportees from Iran report
discriminatory treatment, loss of livelihoods and reduced freedom of movement, with returns driven by heightened
uncertainty, shrinking protection space in countries of asylum, rising prices and disruptions to daily life. Women
returnees in Afghanistan face compounded protection risks alongside severe barriers to services and housing
security, with 45 per cent reporting eviction or threat of eviction compared to 14 per cent of male-headed
households. No significant inflows of Iranian nationals into Afghanistan have been verified.
J U N E  2 0 2 6
15 P A K I S T A N  — P R O T E C T I O N  R I S K S  &  R E S P O N S E
1M+
Afghans returned from Pakistan in 2025 (154,600 deported)
450,000+
Afghans returned from Pakistan in 2026 (as of 31 May)
54
Refugee villages de-notified (26 vacated)
PRIORITY ANALYSIS & PROTECTION RISKS
Following the implementation of the Illegal Foreigners Repatriation Plan (IFRP), all Afghans in Pakistan — except
visa holders — had been designated as illegal foreigners by August 2025, exposing them to arrest and forced
deportation. More than one million Afghans returned in 2025, of whom approximately 154,600 were deported;
pressure continues in 2026 with more than 450,000+ returning as of 31 May, including 50.3% females and 52.1%
children, . Since 2025, Afghans have been required to relocate out of the Islamabad Capital Territory and adjacent
urban areas. All 54 refugee villages have been de-notified, of which 26 had been vacated by May 2026.
Worsening conflict between Afghanistan and Pakistan from late February 2026 led to the temporary closure of
major border crossings and the Azakhel Voluntary Repatriation Centre (VRC), leaving many Afghans intending to
return in limbo. Pakistan-Afghanistan border crossings have now reopened, as has the Azakhel VRC which
processed more than 16,000 Afghans in May (scheduling has been put in place to manage the numbers). Truck
congestion at the Torkham border has been cleared and border processing is now relatively smooth. All borders
are open for returns/deportations.
Continuing implementation of the IFRP has driven increased arrests, detention and raids targeting Afghans —
particularly those lacking valid documentation — resulting in harassment, evictions and mounting host community
pressure. Those unable to return, including those who would be at heightened risk of harm upon return to
Afghanistan due to their profiles, remain largely confined to their homes due to fear of arrest and deportation,
with consequent loss of livelihoods and disrupted education. Afghan refugees continue to face significant barriers
to health, education and WASH services alongside escalating protection risks: GBV is widely reported; child labour
and early and forced marriage are rising due to economic hardship; family separation is increasingly documented in
the context of arrests and deportations; and access to mental health and psychosocial support remains limited.
PROTECTION RESPONSE 
C O U N T R Y- S P E C I F I C  
A D V O C A C Y  &  
O P E R A T I O N A L  
P R I O R I T I E S
Call for the operationalization of Legal Stay Options 
for Afghans with valid reasons to remain in Pakistan 
including students and those married to Pakistanis.
Returns be conducted in a dignified manner. Access to 
essential services be maintained in the interim.
Activate RCM for any Iran influx.
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
Alongside legal and targeted assistance, the key response is advocacy (and offers of support) to the Government
of Pakistan’s establishment of a profile-based procedural mechanism permitting issuance of protective
documentation granting the holder exemption from forced deportation. These registration-based documentation
procedures would prevent harm to vulnerable Afghans at heightened risk upon return and those with other
humanitarian needs. For the broader Afghan population, advocacy continues at federal and provincial levels,
complemented by support to facilitate gradual, dignified, sustainable returns while ensuring interim access to
essential services. Support for vulnerable refugees focuses on adapting community-based protection structures
and service access through mobile, virtual and area-based delivery, including for Afghans living in hiding or
frequently relocating. A community-based, survivor-centred GBV and MHPSS response is being implemented,
with integrated specialized care from trained counsellors and psychologists. Service delivery is being expanded in
Voluntary Repatriation Centres and plans are in place for the development of Multi-Purpose Hubs in Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan. In response to the Iran situation, additional border monitoring and inter-agency
coordination are reinforced for potential influx.
Persons with disabilities and older persons face compounded barriers to services. Delays in accessing scholarship
disbursements have forced some refugee students into work. The indirect impacts of the Middle East escalation —
including fuel price surges and disrupted supply chains — have further eroded already fragile household
livelihoods. While the evolving situation in Iran has not yet had a significant direct impact on Pakistan in terms of
refugee movements, preparedness planning and coordination are in place.
J U N E  2 0 2 6
16 I R A Q  — P R O T E C T I O N  R I S K S  &  R E S P O N S E
8,926
Iranian asylum-seekers & refugees 
8,691
Of whom in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq
350,433
Total Refugees and Asylum Seekers in Iraq 
PRIORITY ANALYSIS & PROTECTION RISKS
Hostilities in the Middle East have had so far a limited impact on the existing protection context for refugees and
asylum seekers in Iraq in general. Small numbers of Iranian asylum-seekers and refugees have entered Iraq due to
the conflict, with approaches to UNHCR for registration remaining stable and in line with previous trends.
The main impact has been on existing Iranian refugee communities in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, where 8,691 of
the 8,926 Iranian asylum-seekers and refugees registered with UNHCR as of end May 2026 reside — a protracted
population present in Iraq for many years, including women and children. Some of these communities reside in
settlements repeatedly targeted by drone attacks, including after the ceasefire, prompting many families to
relocate. These dynamics heighten protection risks for children, including exposure to violence and psychological
distress. Freedom of movement for Iranian asylum-seekers and refugees has been restricted in one governorate,
and instances of discrimination driven by heightened local security sensitivities have been reported, with risks —
including the physical and psychological impact of continued attacks — persisting for this population, particularly
affecting children’s well-being.
For other refugee and asylum-seeker populations, the security situation in March and April caused temporary
disruptions to in-person protection services including registration and legal counselling, and departures for
resettlement were affected by the temporary airspace closure. Further disruptions to the issuance of
documentation, including birth registration, would heighten child protection risks, constraining their access to
services. Additionally, interruptions to in-person education risk increasing child labour, child marriage and other
harmful coping strategies.
PROTECTION RESPONSE 
In preparation for a possible influx from Iran, in support of the government, an inter-agency contingency plan was
developed by UNHCR together with WFP, WHO, IOM, UNFPA, UNICEF and UN Women as the core group. The
plan describes a comprehensive government led response upholding non-refoulement, access to registration and
documentation, and access to national services. Activities at the border crossing points and border data will
complement and inform planning at all stages of the response, including border and protection monitoring conducted
by UNHCR, with IOM’s Displacement Tracking Matrix complementing data on population movements. Registration
and legal assistance remain UNHCR's frontline mechanism: once registered, refugees and asylum-seekers can obtain
government-issued documentation and access public services, including education, health, child protection and
GBV. Strengthening gender-responsive protection services – both government and locally led - remains critical to
ensuring that women and girls, including female-headed households, can access legal documentation, protection
services, livelihoods support and community-based assistance, while reducing barriers to participation, recovery and
durable solutions. It is worth noting, however, government service capacity is increasingly under strain, including
limitations in social workforce capacity. Some GBV survivors may also not feel safe in accessing government facilities.
As such, targeted capacity support to national protection systems and local actors will be essential to sustain access
to these services.
C O U N T R Y- S P E C I F I C  
A D V O C A C Y  &  
O P E R A T I O N A L  
P R I O R I T I E S
non-refoulement, access to 
territory, registration and documentation and access 
to national services for any new arrivals
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
These economic shocks, combined with energy and food price volatility, have deepened socio-economic
vulnerability across Iraq including among refugee populations increasing risks of harmful coping mechanisms that
disproportionately affect children. Women and girls may face heightened protection risks as economic pressures,
displacement-related vulnerabilities and family separation intersect. Early signals also point to heightened anxiety
and precautionary behaviour affecting women's and girls' movement and engagement in public life. These
constraints may further limit women's participation in economic and community life, reduce access to support
networks and protection services, and undermine prospects for sustainable reintegration and recovery.
Across Iraq, the broader regional situation — particularly the blockade of the Strait of Hormuz — has driven inflation 
and rising prices of basic goods. Iraqi oil production reportedly fell by as much as 70 per cent, with potential long-
term economic repercussions. The IQD–USD exchange rate has fluctuated by up to 20 per cent. 
J U N E  2 0 2 6
17 T Ü R K I Y E  — P R O T E C T I O N  R I S K S  &  R E S P O N S E
285,800
Iranians crossed into Türkiye (as of 21 May 2026)
252,900
Iranian nationals crossed back into Iran (as of 21 May 2026)
667,565
Voluntary returns to Syria
PRIORITY ANALYSIS & PROTECTION RISKS
Cross-border movements continue to largely reflect routine mobility rather than large-scale displacement. Iranian
nationals may enter Türkiye under the existing visa-exemption regime for up to 90 days, and entry and exit figures
have remained stable, with no indication of change in the profile or reasons for travel of arriving Iranian nationals.
The vast majority interviewed by UNHCR upon arrival reported no restrictions on crossing and no impediments to
access to territory. While movements remain predominantly orderly and regular — comprising families and
individuals travelling for varying reasons — some individuals have indicated an intention to seek international
protection, and the proportion reporting that their decision to cross was taken following recent developments in
Iran continues to increase rather than stabilise.
Afghan nationals continue to constitute the majority of those apprehended in border provinces with Iran, with no
large-scale influx directly linked to the conflict observed during the reporting period. The Afghan population in
Türkiye nonetheless describes the situation in Iran as a source of heightened psychological stress, particularly due
to concerns for relatives remaining there and difficulties maintaining communication with them.
PROTECTION RESPONSE
Cross-border movements of Iranian nationals have not resulted in major changes to the protection environment or
triggered large-scale emergency response measures, with most arrivals continuing to enter regularly through the
visa-exemption regime. UNHCR continues to monitor the situation in close coordination with the Presidency of
Migration Management (PMM) and partners.
Preparedness focuses on reinforcing coordination, strengthening information management and analysis, and
mapping response capacities to ensure readiness should movements increase. Inter-agency coordination
mechanisms remain in place. The response is anchored in support to national systems through technical capacity
sharing, coordination support and engagement with public institutions and municipalities.
Existing protection services continue through national and partner systems, including community-based protection,
information and counselling, legal assistance and referrals, and child protection and GBV prevention and response.
C O U N T R Y- S P E C I F I C  
A D V O C A C Y  &  
O P E R A T I O N A L  
P R I O R I T I E S
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
The recent regional escalation is placing growing pressure on Türkiye's already stretched resources for refugees.
Annual inflation reached 32.37% in April 2026, partly driven by rising fuel costs linked to regional instability,
making everyday essentials more expensive for both host communities and the over 2 million refugees Türkiye
supports. A prolonged conflict risks pushing Türkiye's current account deficit significantly higher, pressuring the
overall national capacity. The impact of the regional situation on socio-economic conditions in Türkiye warrants
continued monitoring.
Voluntary returns to Syria from Türkiye continue, though at a slightly reduced rate compared to previous months,
with community feedback indicating that hesitancy is driven primarily by economic conditions, limited livelihood
opportunities, housing shortages and access to services inside Syria rather than broader regional developments.
The impact of the regional situation on socio-economic conditions in Türkiye warrants regular monitoring.
Continued monitoring of demographic profiles — including sex, age, disability, and household composition — is
ongoing to identify emerging protection needs, with particular attention to vulnerable groups, including women
travelling alone, female-headed households, and older persons. Changes in mobility patterns, economic stress, and
family separation may heighten exposure to GBV, trafficking, exploitation, and psychosocial distress; gender-
specific protection return monitoring and referral pathways should be maintained.
J U N E  2 0 2 6
18 A R M E N I A  &  T U R K M E N I S T A N  
ARMENIA
The regional escalation has not materially altered the protection environment in Armenia. The Agarak border
crossing with Iran remains open, with no impediments to access to territory, freedom of movement, or risk of
refoulement. Official statistics for 28 February–15 April indicate near-equal entry and exit volumes (18,270 entries;
17,515 exits), with those entering predominantly commercial truck drivers. No large-scale displacement-driven
movements have been observed. Iranian nationals may enter, transit, and remain in Armenia visa-free for up to 90
days in any 180-day period; this arrangement remains in place.
Since 28 February, UNHCR has scaled up border monitoring and engaged national authorities on emergency
preparedness and mass influx response. The Government of Armenia remains committed to its 1951 Convention
obligations, and regular RSD procedures apply. Between 28 February and 5 May, 16 asylum applications were
received from Iranians and 2 from Iraqi nationals who had transited through Iran. In April, the Migration and
Citizenship Service extended consideration of pending Iranian claims submitted prior to 28 February by one month.
The number of Iranians approaching UNHCR for counselling has increased significantly, focused on asylum
procedures, financial and housing assistance, and resettlement.
Reception and assistance capacity remains constrained. The sole reception centre — at full capacity of approximately
60 beds before the conflict — faces pressure against 600 asylum requests in 2025 and 170 in the first quarter of
2026. Government cash assistance is limited to three months: approximately USD 55 per month for a household
head and USD 40 per additional family member. Preparedness priorities include an RSD office in Meghri, closer to
the point of entry, and additional translation capacity through MCS and UNHCR's partner.
Armenia remains in a preparedness phase. Planning has been carried out in support of Government-led preparedness, with
UNHCR coordinating refugee-oriented discussions in line with its mandate, working closely with WFP, UNDP, IOM, UN
Women, UNICEF and UNFPA. This has included a focus on asylum access and protection-sensitive planning. NGO
contributions have been coordinated by the Government of Armenia, supported by UNHCR. The current operational
response remains limited and is primarily focused on supporting individuals accessing the asylum system, providing
necessary counselling and referrals, and delivering assistance to persons with identified protection needs.
TURKMENISTAN
C O U N T R Y- S P E C I F I C  
A D V O C A C Y  &  
O P E R A T I O N A L  
P R I O R I T I E S
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
Turkmenistan shares an extensive 1,148 km border with Iran. No major changes to the protection environment have
been observed in the country since the start of the regional escalation. All four border crossing points with Iran
(Sarakhs, Gaudan, Altyn Asyr and Artyk) remain open for all nationalities in line with entry and exit requirements of the
country. Since February 2026, safe transit of third-country nationals has been facilitated by the government through
its borders as a "humanitarian corridor".
The Government of Turkmenistan retains primary responsibility and operational leadership for all emergency
preparedness and response activities within its territory. The country remains committed to its obligations under the
1951 Convention and its 1967 Protocol. Temporary protection, preparedness and response measures are grounded in
the national legal framework, including the Law on Refugees, the Law on Humanitarian Assistance in Emergency
Situations, and other relevant legislation.
Preparedness and response efforts are focused on supporting national protection capacity to respond effectively in
the event of a mass influx.
The Inter-Agency Contingency Plan (IACP) was developed by the UN Country Team in Turkmenistan, defining the role
of UN Systems for preparedness and response in case of a mass influx. The plan establishes the inter-agency
coordination architecture, whereby the UN Resident Coordinator will facilitate system-wide coordination among UN
agencies (UNICEF, UNHCR, IOM, WHO, UNFPA, OHCHR and UNDP), while the inter-agency response will be
coordinated through the Refugee Coordination Forum and guided by the Refugee Coordination Model (RCM), with
UNHCR providing overall coordination leadership under RCM and sectoral co-leads designated in line with global
guidance.
UNHCR, together with UNICEF in Turkmenistan, is coordinating a series of joint preparedness activities planned for
June and July under the framework of the IACP. In addition, UNHCR has established a partnership framework
agreement with the National Red Crescent Society of Turkmenistan to strengthen the operational preparedness
capacities on the ground.
Turkmenistan: Maintain access to territory and uphold 1951 
Convention obligations and national legal framework.
Expand joint preparedness activities under IACP (June–July 
2026) with UNICEF and National Red Crescent.
Support RCM coordination architecture and ensure readiness for 
mass-influx scenario if conditions change.
J U N E  2 0 2 6
RAFT
WIDER EFFECTS ON REFUGEE PROTECTION IN HOST CONTEXTS IN THE REGION  
The wider impact of the situation is also affecting host country contexts in the region that are not facing direct refugee inflows or returns due to the hostilities in Iran and Lebanon, including through economic consequences and government
reprioritisation during a period of heightened security concern. Protection actors also highlight that the knock-on effect of the situation in Lebanon on Syria’s refugee returns sustainable reintegration capacity may impact the returns decision-
making of Syrian refugees elsewhere, highlighting the need for continued quality of asylum in host countries.
Given the complex dynamics and grave humanitarian consequences of ongoing hostilities in Gaza, the situation for forcibly displaced in the Occupied Palestinian Territory is covered in detail outside of this document (see box below).
2025 Baseline: 404,179 registered Syrian refugees in Jordan as of 31 May 2026 as well as more than 2.39 million
registered Palestine refugees, some 3,000 of whom are Palestine Refugees from Syria without legal status in
Jordan. The VAF 2026 (UNHCR, published 20 May 2026) provides the most current baseline for sociology-
economic vulnerabilities and protection risks refugees in Jordan face and should be referenced for all current
vulnerability data. The UNHCR Basic Needs Cash Assessment (April 2026) identifies cash assistance as the primary
stabiliser for refugee households. Debt is a significant barrier to return, with households holding debts averaging
1,600 JOD per household (49% cite debt as barrier to return).
Post-28 February 2026: Indirect Exposure: No direct refugee inflows from the 2026 escalation have been recorded.
The primary indirect impact channel is economic spillover through trade disruption and energy prices, compounding
pre-existing fiscal pressures on the Jordanian government.
Funding constraints and response adjustments: The government has launched technical consultations with line
ministries, UN agencies and donors on a revised and prioritized Jordan Response Plan for the refugee response
given the changes in Syria since December 2024, the needs of refugees wishing to return to Syria and the needs of
those who wish to remain in Jordan. Severe funding shortages, however, place vulnerable refugees in a critical
situation, especially in the camps, where refugees are almost entirely dependent on humanitarian assistance. The
knock-on effect on donor and government attention being absorbed by the ongoing crisis in the Middle East and
acute needs in countries other than Jordan is being felt operationally at a moment of heightened need.
Return dynamics — downstream implications: No direct impact on Syrian return decision-making from Jordan has
been recorded to date, though continued insecurity in areas of origin from where many refugees in Jordan hail, such
as Dara’a, and the sharp increase in largely-involuntary crossings from Lebanon to Syria (413,800; 2 Mar-11 May
2026) is placing pressure on absorption capacity in Syria, and may negatively affect return decisions over the
medium term.
Advocacy: Maintain programming and funding for protection, including for continued registration and
documentation, and for priorities emerging from the government-led consultations on the updated Jordan
Response Plan.
2025 Baseline : ~98,089 registered Syrian refugees in Egypt (UNHCR, May 2026), alongside 851,590 Sudanese
refugees (31 May 2026; 76% of total registered population; with ~55,000 in registration backlog, speaking to already
strained protection systems, following the Sudan shock). According to the EVAR 2025, 65% of refugee households
are highly or extremely vulnerable. Female-headed households face the most severe deprivation. 58% are food
insecure; 38% of food-insecure households have at least one child under five needing urgent nutrition support; 92%
rely on food consumption-based coping strategies. Service access and legal environment: 48% of school-age children
are out of school; 29% cannot access health services (94% cite cost); 76% of refugee HHs rent; 61% face eviction risk.
Negative sentiment from host community towards refugees has been surging as the socio-economic situation has
worsened. A new asylum law enacted December 2024 transfers key registration, RSD and
documentation responsibilities from UNHCR to the Egyptian authorities (PCRA); executive regulations issued on of
21 May 2026. Humanitarian funding gap exceeded 70% of total requirements by end-2025, triggering cuts in food,
cash, and protection services.
Post-28 February 2026: Indirect Exposure and Documented Knock-On Effects: While not directly affected by the
hostilities, Egypt has experienced energy and economic pressures explicitly attributed by the Egyptian government to
the regional situation. Fuel prices have increased as a result, further affecting the purchasing power and resilience to
protection risks of the refugee population. Government measures: Government-mandated closure of commercial
establishments from 9pm for the month of April 2026 — explicitly announced as an energy-saving response to the
regional situation — directly reduced informal income for urban refugees. Detention and child protection: A surge in
detention of persons of concern is an ongoing and documented protection concern running in parallel to the conflict-
related dynamics. Child protection risks — early marriage, child labour, and informal work as negative coping
strategies — were identified in the EVAR 2025 baseline and are assessed to have worsened under post-escalation
economic pressure.
Advocacy: Scale up protection and access to essential services for refugees, promote social cohesion and counter
xenophobia, strengthen protection safeguards, including throughout the transition to a national asylum
management system.
OCCUPIED PALESTINIAN TERRITORY (oPt): More than 934,000 registered Palestine Refugees live in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in Gaza the population includes some 1.6 million Palestine Refugees.
The OPT faces a protracted political crisis, marked by decades of Israeli military occupation, non-compliance with IHL and IHRL and internal Palestinian divisions. The Gaza Strip has been under blockade since 2007 and has experienced
recurrent escalations of hostilities between Israeli forces and Palestinian armed groups. The latest round of hostilities, which began in October 2023, has led to unprecedented levels of death, destruction, and suffering. For more
information, please visit UNRWA and OCHA resources.
JORDAN EGYPT
SYRIAN REFUGEE RETURN INTENTIONS — Flash Survey (January 2025, UNHCR): Egypt 42% near-term intent (12 months) — highest of all countries; Jordan 40%; Lebanon 24%; Iraq 12%; Regional average 27%. Both Egypt and Jordan show high long-term aspiration (83% and
85% respectively). 70% of Jordan-hosted Syrians interested in ‘go-and-see’ visits before committing to return. ERPIS Wave 2 (April 2026): updated Egypt- and Jordan-specific findings published 26 April 2026. Note: these figures predate the 28 February 2026 escalation.
19
J U N E  2 0 2 6
J U N E  2 0 2 6
PROTECTION COORDINATION FORA
Country Inter-Agency Protection Coordination Mechanism
Iran Country Refugee Response Plan (CRRP) — Protection Working Group (PRT WG) (10 protection partners, chaired by UNHCR).
Afghanistan Protection Coordination Group (PCG) — bringing together protection partners at national and sub-national levels (74 protection partners, coordinated by UNHCR and co-coordinated by NRC).
Pakistan Refugee Protection Working Group (RPWG) under the Refugee Coordination Model (RCM) — coordinating protection response for Afghan refugees (61 protection partners, co-chaired by UNHCR and the 
Commissionerate for Afghan Refugees).
Türkiye Refugee Coordination Model (RCM) — Protection Working Group coordinating inter-agency protection response (57 protection partners, chaired by UNHCR).
Iraq Ad-hoc inter-agency protection coordination mechanism for contingency planning including both UNs and NGOs — following the deactivation of the Protection Platform at end of 2025, coordination continues 
through thematic groups (Example: Gender) alongside dedicated contingency planning meetings with 7 UN agencies as a core group.
Lebanon Lebanon Response Plan (LRP) —Protection Sector / Working Group coordinating inter-agency protection response (78 protection partners, led by MoSA, coordinated by UNHCR and co-coordinated by OXFAM).
Syria Protection Sector— coordinating protection response across Syria in line with the IASC cluster approach (154 protection partners, coordinated by UNHCR and co-coordinated by IRC). 
Jordan Refugee Coordination Model (RCM-Protection Sector and sub-sectors (GBVCP) – Protection Working Group (53 protection partners, co-chaired by UNHCR with the National Council for Family Affairs).
Egypt Refugee Coordination Model (RCM) – Protection Working Group (43 protection partners, chaired by UNHCR). 
Turkmenistan Joint preparedness framework — coordinates preparedness activities under the Inter-Agency Contingency Plan (IACP), with RCM coordination architecture to be established for mass-influx scenarios (4 protection 
partners).
Armenia Inter-agency preparedness coordination — Armenia remains in a preparedness phase. UN agencies and partners coordinate through established inter-agency mechanisms, with UNHCR facilitating refugee 
preparedness discussions with the Government on asylum access, protection-sensitive contingency planning, and preparedness (8 protection partners).
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
20
21 INTER-AGENCY PROTECTION PARTNERS
Country Protection Partners
Afghanistan For purposes of ensuring confidentiality , the full list of protection partners in Afghanistan is not made public. Please rea ch out to the Protection Coordination Group for any questions related to partners in the country.
Armenia UNICEF, UNHCR, IOM, PiN, Mission Armenia NGO, ACH, UNDP, UN Women
Egypt
Protection WG: (UNHCR, UNICEF, UNFPA, IOM, WHO, WFP, UN Women, MSF, DRC/MMC, Plan International, CRS, TdH, SCI, HI, ACF, DIHR, EFRR, CARE Egypt, Caritas Egypt, StARS, Etijah, Al Ghad, Balqees, Dajo 
(URN), CEMC, EUAA, ICRC, RCO, INGO Forum), Child Protection WG: (UNHCR, UNICEF, SC, Caritas, Plan International, CRS, stARS, URN, MSF, Etijah, Tdh/PSTIC, Lifemakers), Community Based-Protection WG: (URN, 
CEMC, EFRR, CRS, ERC, HI, IOM, Plan International, stARS, Elghad Foundation, UNICEF, SC, WFP, Independent diplomat, Bunyan, EFACC, WatanCBO), GBV WG: (UNHCR, UNFPA, IOM, ICRC,WFP, CARE, Caritas, CRS, 
EFRR, Etijah, Mersal, MSF, Plan International, Refuge Egypt, SC, stARS, Balqees,URN, Tadamon, UNFPA-MoYS Project)
Iran UNHCR, IOM, UNICEF, UNFPA, NRC, WHO, WFP, INTERSOS, RI, ICRC
Iraq UN Core group (UNHCR, WFP, WHO, IOM, UNFPA, UNICEF and UN Women), RAMI (Rapid Assistance Mechanism for Iraq, INGO led consortium including Action against Hunger, DRC, Intersos, La Chaîne de l'espoir, 
MAG,  TdH, Tearfund) and other NGOs
Jordan
ACF, AAH, ACTED, AHS, AMR, ANERA, ARCS, ARDD, AVSI, AWO, Caritas Jordan, CDE, COOPI, DRC, EFE - Jordan, HA, Habitat for Humanity, IFH/NHF, IMC, Intersos, IOCC, IOM, IRC, Islamic Charity Center Society,
JHAS, JRF, JWU, LWF, Madrasati, Mateen, MEDAIR, Mercy Corps, MOSD, NRC, OXFAM, Plan International, Questscope, SAMS, SCJ, SOS, TDH, TDH-Italy, TUA, UN Women, UNDP, UNFPA, UNHCR, UNICEF, UNOPS,
VDT, VTC, WFP, WVI.
Lebanon
ABAAD, AICA, Al Fayhaa, Al Midan, ALA, Alpha, AMEL, AND, ANERA, Arcenciel, AVSI, B&Z, CARE, Caritas Lebanon, CESVI, CVC Charity, DCA, DPNA, DRC, Embrace, FSF, Handicap International, Himaya, Himaya Daeem 
Aataa (HDA) Association, HOOPS, IDRAAC, Imam Sadr Foundation, Intersos, IOM, IRC, Justice Without Frontiers, KAFA, Key of Life, Lavender Gate, Lebanese Social Responsibility - LSR, LECORVAW, LOST, LUPD, 
Makhzoumi, MECC, Medical Aid for Palestinians (MAP-UK), Michel Daher Social Foundation - MDSF, Migration Services and Development - MSD, MMM, Mouvement Social, Nabaa, Nabad, NISCVT, NRC, OXFAM, Plan 
International, PUI, Rahma Association, RDFL, RESTART Lebanon, Right to Play, RMF, Roaa, Sanabel Al janoub, SAWA Group, SCI, Seenaryo, SHEILD, Shift, SI - Solidarités international, SIDC, SIF, Social Urjuwan, Tabitha-
Dorcas, TdH-It, TdH-L, The Forum for the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, The Lebanese Association For Family Health - SALAMA, UN Women, UNICEF, Utopia, War Child, WVI
Pakistan
National Disaster Management Authority, Aga Khan Rural Support Programme, Sarhad Rural Support Programme, Balochistan Rural S upport Programme, Health Department Balochistan, MSF, PDMA Balochistan, BBW, 
IRP, DANESH, CAR-Balochistan, Taraqee Foundation, SWD, SPO, PPHI, RDO Buner, Pakistan Red Crescent Society, IRC, AHO, SHARP, BWDO, RDO, WAJ, HI, UNHabitat, SPARC, SPADO, MERF, IWO, IOM, SEHER, 
WEO, IMC, UNHCR, UNICEF, Rahnuma Family Planning Association of Pakistan, Active Help Organization, Shuaa Welfare Foundation, Alpha Foundation, ACTED, Pelican Development Organization, Youth Front Pakistan, 
Sustainable Peace and Development Organization, INSPIRE, BUITEMS, MDM, Sabawon, WESS, DFCA, IHHN, Civil Society Support Programme, KK, Medecins Sans Frontieres/Holand(OCA), Peace Foundation, The Aware 
Foundation (TAF) Pakistan, CPWC, NADRA, UNOPS, RI, ROZAN, RISE Foundation.
Syria
Due to the large number of Sector partners and for the purposes of ensuring confidentiality, the full list of protection part ners in is not shared here. Please reach out to the Protection Sector for any questions related to 
partners in the country.
Turkiye
AHF, ASAM, CARE International, DDD, Dünya Evimiz, Eksi 25, EVSAD, Field Ready Türkiye, Gaziantep Metropolitan Municipality, Genç Hayat Vakfı, GOAL International, Hand in Hand, Hatay Metropolitan Municipality, 
HRDF, Human Appeal, ICMPD, IGAM, IOM, Islamic Relief Worldwide, KADAV, Kaos GL, Kilis Provincial Municipality, LEAP NGO, LWA, Mavi Kalem, Maya Foundation, MUDEM, Multeciler Dernegi, NSPPL, Qatar Charity, 
REALs, Refugee Rights Türkiye, Relief International, RET International, SAMS, Sanliurfa Metropolitan Municipality, SARD, SC, SENED Organization, SEVKAR, STL, TARDE, TKV, TRC, UMHD, UNFPA, UNHCR, UNICEF, 
WALD, WHH, World Human Relief, Yedi Basak, Yeryüzü Çocukları Derneği, YSF, Zero Discrimination Association
Turkmenistan UNICEF, UNFPA, IOM, UNHCR
J U N E  2 0 2 6
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
22 M E T H O D O L O G Y  A N D  C O O R D I N A T I O N
This inter-agency Refugee Protection Overview synthesizes country-level observations and analysis from Protection
Working Groups and other IA protection fora engaged in refugee protection across the Middle East situation. Inputs
were gathered via a standardised template in April 2026, updated at end-May. This was complemented by NGO and
UN agency inputs at cross-regional level, including drawing on monitoring data, assessments and field insights.
Written input at the cross-regional level was directly provided by DRC, IRC, IOM, UN-DCO, UNDP, UNICEF, UNFPA,
UNRWA, UN Women, WFP. A dedicated cross-regional meeting was held to discuss and validate the analysis at
technical level in May. A Cross-Regional Refugee Coordinator led meeting with NGOs’ and UN Agencies’ regional
directors and members of the donor community was held in early June, ahead of finalization of the document. UNHCR
expresses sincere gratitude for strong collaboration at all levels.
This product aims to provide a narrative overview and highlight key emerging themes, Further analytical products will
follow based on inter-agency agreement, including a planned protection snapshot for Q2-2026 (cross population).
I N T E R- A G E N C Y  R E F U G E E  P R O T E C T I O N  O V E R V I E W  — M I D D L E  E A S T  S I T U A T I O N
©UNHCR/Housam Hariri
REFUGEE EXPERIENCES
Over the last couple of months, the list of people who have debts and owe me money has got longer and longer. This book is full of 
their names and the amount they owe me. I have to sell people things on credit and don't know if I will ever be repaid.
Bahzad Mohammad
Syrian refugee and small market owner, Basirma refugee camp, Iraq
I felt trapped in fear, unable to sleep, work, or even leave enclosed spaces, but after the livelihoods support received, today, I am 
unable to plan my days, support my family, and look toward the future.
Abu Mohammad
Recent refugee returnee to Syria - Mawaddah community centre, Homs Governorate, Syria
The overall atmosphere within the community is high - tense with widespread anxiety and stress driven by rising inflation
and loos of livelihoods. Many families relay on daily wages, and the loss of work has made it increasing difficult to afford
food, rent and medical expenses.
Afghan Refugees in Iran
Protection Overview of Afghan Refugees in Iran - Key Protection Risks, Needs and Priorities amid Economic Pressure and Insecurity, April
2026
For further information, please contact Camilla Jelbart jelbartm@unhcr.org and Ruxandra Bujor bujor@unhcr.org.
J U N E  2 0 2 6