United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 
 
Highlights 
 Following the 24 June earthquakes of magnitude 7.2 and 7.5 (18:00 local 
time), authorities report more than 1,200 aftershocks. 
 Official toll: 4,561 people dead and 16,740 injured. 
 A total of 6,462 people have been rescued. 
 An additional appeal for US$298  million was launched to scale up the 
earthquake response and address the multisectoral needs of 1.3 million 
people over the next six months. 
 The United Nations system and its partner organizations, in coordination with 
the Government, are responding with multisectoral actions and will continue 
to scale up assistance to affected people. 
 
Situation overview 
Venezuela is facing a national 
emergency following two consecutive 
high-magnitude earthquakes (7.2 and 
7.5) that struck on 24 June (18:00 local 
time) in the north- central region, with 
the epicentre located along the San 
Felipe–Yumare–Montalbán axis 
(Yaracuy/Carabobo). Authorities 
report 1,254 aftershocks. 
 
Nineteen days since the earthquakes , 
authorities report a toll of 4,561 people 
dead, 16,740 injured and 6,462 
rescued since the onset  of the 
emergency. Authorities also indicated 
that 17,907 people remain without 
housing.  
 
The Government response remains focused on search operations, the management of transitional camps 
and assistance to affected populations. The United Nations and its partner organizations, in coordination 
with the authorities, continue implementing multisectoral response activities and scaling up assistance. 
United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator Tom 
Fletcher announced a US$298 million addendum to the Humanitarian Response Plan aimed at 
addressing the multisectoral needs of 1.3 million people over the next six months. This is in addition 
to the 5.5 million people already targeted under the 2026 Humanitarian Response Plan, which requires 
US$632 million in funding. 
 
Impact on infrastructure 
 Authorities report at least 856 affected buildings, including 190 that have collapsed.  
 As part of recovery and reconstruction planning, authorities have identified 40 sites in La Guaira 
State, covering approximately 584,000 square metres, for the development of housing projects 
intended for affected populations.  
 Situation Report No. 20 
 Earthquakes in Venezuela 
 13 July 2026 
 Time: 9:00 pm 
 
4,561 
16,740 
People 
dead 
 
People 
injured
OCHA | 2 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 An initial assessment by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) indicates 
that direct damage to housing and infrastructure amounts to approximately US$37 billion. Most of 
the damage, estimated at around US$24 billion, is concentrated  in housing, businesses, schools, 
hospitals, and public facilities. Meanwhile, preliminary estimates by UNDP indicate direct physical 
damage of US$6.7 billion, equivalent to 6 per cent of GDP. 
 
National response 
 The Government response remains focused on search and rescue operations, as well as assistance 
to affected people. 
 According to authorities, the response continues with 107 transitional camps supporting affected 
populations, with a capacity of 25,064 people and a current occupancy of 20,231 people. As of 
13 July, 40 camps are located in Caracas, 29 in Miranda, 28 in La Guaira, and 10 in Aragua. 
 Authorities are advancing a unified registration process for affected families in transitional camps 
through the collection of biometric and contact information to support assistance management, social 
support programmes and housing solutions. 
 The Government of Venezuela announced the creation of an initial reconstruction fund equivalent to 
US$200 million. 
 A psychosocial support hotline remains available for affected people: 0800-AYUDA-01. 
 A digital form has been launched by the National Council for Persons with Disabilities (CONAPDIS) 
to support a timely and inclusive response in affected areas. 
 Mechanisms have been established to locate missing persons (www.localizapacientes.com) and to 
report affected individuals (0-800-RESCATE). 
 School activities remain suspended in affected municipalities across the states of Aragua (Santiago 
Mariño, Girardot, Ocumare de la Costa de Oro and Tovar); Carabobo (Juan José Mora, Puerto 
Cabello, Naguanagua and Valencia); Falcón (José Laurencio Silva); La Guaira (Vargas); the Capital 
District (Libertador); and Miranda (Chacao, Baruta, El Hatillo, Sucre, Plaza, Zamora, Acevedo, Brión, 
Buroz, Páez, Andrés Bello and Pedro Gual). 
 
Situation by state 
Capital District (Caracas) and Miranda  
 First-line responders working in transitional camps participated on 13 July in a Mental Health and 
Psychosocial Support (MHPSS) training coordinated by the MHPSS, Child Protection and Gender -
Based Violence (GBV) Areas of Responsibility, with support from the Ministry of Health, Cecodap 
and Cedesex. 
 
Response actions: Organizations such as Tinta Violeta, FUNDANA and World Vision are providing 
protection support to affected families, particularly through psychosocial assistance.  
 
La Guaira 
 Authorities and humanitarian organizations continue strengthening the response in La Guaira’s 
transitional camps through the expansion of multisectoral services, improvements in accommodation 
conditions and coordinated assistance management. During the reporting period, progress was 
made in the distribution of essential items, food assistance , protection activities, health and 
psychosocial support interventions, as well as actions to improve access to safe water, sanitation, 
connectivity and community infrastructure. 
 
Carabobo and Yaracuy (epicentral zone) 
 In Carabobo, the most significant impacts continue to be concentrated in Juan José Mora 
municipality (Morón parish). In Yaracuy, particularly in Veroes municipality and other localities near 
the epicentral area, homes have been reported as destroyed or at high risk. Recent assessments 
have identified priority needs in protection, mental health and psychosocial support, health, shelter, 
water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), and food security.
OCHA | 3 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
Response actions: Five organizations (Venezuelan Red Cross, CESAP, Tierra Viva, Cáritas Morón 
and Empodérame) are providing response in health, food, water and the distribution of humanitarian 
assistance. 
 
Falcón (Tucacas – Silva municipality) 
 In Boca de Aroa parish, soil liquefaction caused ground settlement and slab displacement affecting 
87 houses, compromising the habitability of homes for 252 people. Civil Protection authorities and 
structural engineers continue conducting technical assessm ents. Authorities also continue 
monitoring the overflow of the Aroa River and Los Ingleses stream within a multi -hazard context 
involving both earthquake and flood risks. 
 A technical inspection conducted on 11 July by the Presidential Commission for Habitability 
Assessment determined that the Boca de Yaracuy Bridge is the transport infrastructure most 
severely affected by the earthquakes in the area. Temporary diversion measures are being prepared 
while reconstruction planning is underway. The La Pava, El Paují and Punta Brava bridges sustained 
minor damage and remain subject to traffic safety measures, speed restrictions and repair works to 
maintain connectivity between Falcón and Carabobo states. 
 
Response actions: Civil Protection requested support to provide Psychological First Aid (PFA) training to 
approximately 300 Civil Protection, Fire Department and VEN 911 personnel, in coordination with 
organizations participating in the Local Coordination Forum. Protection Cluster capacity-building activities 
continue, alongside WASH and psychosocial support interventions in Boca de Aroa and Palmasola 
implemented by Action Against Hunger (ACF), Azul Positivo, IOM, Centroccidente, ODISEF and AVSI. 
 
Other states 
 Anzoátegui: Civil society organizations and humanitarian actors strengthened coordination for the 
response to affected populations, agreeing on a matrix of responsibilities. Eleven Civil Protection 
officers were deployed to humanitarian brigades in La Guaira, and 72 pre -hospital emergency 
students received training on seismic risk management. 
 Apure: More than 250 people have been displaced as a result of the earthquakes. The Local 
Coordination Forum (LCF) continues to monitor household vulnerabilities and provide multisectoral 
assistance, including psychological first aid. 
 Bolívar: Authorities reported assistance to 41 displaced families (127 people, including 60 adults, 
10 older people, 42 children and 15 adolescents), primarily hosted by relatives in the municipalities 
of Caroní (27 families), Angostura del Orinoco (13) and Cedeño (1). The VEN 911 facility was 
activated as a temporary shelter with capacity for 120 people, and the state government has 
dispatched seven humanitarian aid shipments. Coordination with Tinta Violeta is planned to support 
at least 10 vulnerable families. 
 Delta Amacuro: Humanitarian actors distributed 20 food kits and 20 hygiene kits to 20 families, as 
well as approximately 30 kits for children, with support from World Vision International, Médecins 
Sans Frontières and the Lutheran World Federation. Assessment activities  were conducted under 
the coordination of the h ealth authority, Kape -Kape and Tinta Violeta. An inter -institutional 
coordination platform was also established, bringing together regional authorities, the health sector 
and OCHA. 
 Monagas: The Municipality of Maturín provided support to families from La Guaira hosted by 
relatives, including a group of 12 people displaced from Ciudad Caribe who are expecting the arrival 
of four additional family members. Assistance included household items, medicines and supplies to 
improve hosting arrangements, including mattresses, fans and construction materials. 
 Táchira: IOM and ODISEF assisted 11 people on the move at the San Cristóbal bus terminal (five 
women, three men and three children), providing psychoeducational sessions, legal counselling, 
health services, psychological first aid and hygiene kits. An older person and a lactating woman were 
prioritized for assistance. 
 Sucre: A technical team of engineers was deployed to support the assessment, inspection and 
monitoring of earthquake-affected infrastructure in La Guaira and Caracas, contributing to damage 
analysis and recovery planning efforts.
OCHA | 4 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 Zulia: Assistance to displaced populations continues at the Maracaibo passenger terminal and in 
receiving municipalities. The response is being implemented by the Citizen Assistance Office 
(Gerencia de Atención al Ciudadano) and ASONACOP, in coordination with the Red Cross, HIAS, 
CESVI, ASOREZ and Caritas, as well as Child Protection and Rights Councils. 
 Nueva Esparta, Trujillo and Lara reported that coordination, relief collection and monitoring activities 
remain ongoing, while Local Coordination Forums continue to monitor assistance delivery and 
protection risks. 
 
Humanitarian coordination 
 OCHA, together with the Humanitarian Coordinator and in coordination with national authorities, 
continues to coordinate the humanitarian response with the United Nations and partner 
organizations, prioritizing actions in health, shelter, food security, WASH, logistics and protection.  
 UNDAC and OCHA continued supporting Civil Protection in strengthening emergency coordination 
and information management capacities, including technical exchanges on USAR coordination 
mechanisms and operational tracking tools. 
 OCHA continued strengthening coordination with the private sector to support response and early 
recovery efforts, promoting engagement with specialized actors in areas such as logistics, debris 
management, infrastructure rehabilitation and reconstruction planning through existing coordination 
mechanisms between the United Nations and the private sector. 
 Venezuelan authorities requested the activation of the Post -Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) 
within the framework of the United Nations system and with the support of UNDP. In line with the 
internationally recognized PDNA methodology, the corresponding coordination efforts with relevant 
counterparts will be advanced. 
 Authorities informed the activation of a special mechanism to expedite the processing of a “Work 
Visa for Special Situations” through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The procedure will be carried out 
online under the coordination of the Office of the Vice Minister for Multilateral Affairs and the Consular 
Affairs Office. It is intended for foreign personnel of international organizations, as well as United 
Nations staff, deploying to Venezuela in support of the response to the earthquake emergency.  
 
Initial humanitarian response 
Food Security 
 
 Since the start of the response, WFP and its partners have reached over 64,000 people with 
critical food assistance across La Guaira. On 13 July, WFP distributed 390 family food baskets in 
the Urimare communities of Playa Grande, reaching 1,160 people, and an additional 35 family food 
baskets to support meal preparation in temporary shelters located in Carayaca and Cati a La Mar, 
benefiting 140 people. The baskets contain essential dry food commodities, including maize meal, 
rice, pasta, lentils, beans, vegetable oil, and salt, providing approximately 75 percent of household 
food requirements for 30 days. 
 In parallel, hot meal distributions continued across temporary shelters in La Guaira, with 7,233 meals 
served, including 1,364 meals in the Playa Grande community, 2,883 meals at the César Nieves 
Baseball Stadium, and 2,986 meals at the José María Vargas S ports Stadium, ensuring continued 
access to food for displaced and affected families. In parallel, assessment teams continue to 
evaluate market conditions and how to tailor support to the different realities on the ground — 
including beyond La Guaira — as WFP moves toward modalities that allow families to choose how 
to best meet their needs. 
 During the initial phase of the response, Caritas Venezuela distributed 4,481 food assistance kits, 
reaching an estimated 72,000 people. 
Health 
 
 As of 12 July, 22 international Emergency Medical Teams (EMTs) had been deployed, were 
mobilizing or were demobilizing in earthquake- affected areas, supporting the health response
OCHA | 5 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
through emergency medical care, field hospitals, mobile health services and specialized assistance, 
and complementing national capacities. 
 UNICEF provided primary health -care services to 76 people at the José María Vargas Sports 
Complex and César Nieves Stadium camps and administered a total of 183 vaccine doses to 
children and adults across the three transitional camps in La Guaira, including yellow fever and 
tetanus toxoid vaccines. 
 According to Caritas' 13 July report, Caritas Venezuela distributed 73,356 medical supplies and 
medicines, reaching 17,924 people. 
 International Medical Corps (IMC) continues to deploy three Mobile Medical Units (MMUs) in La 
Guaira state, providing health services in Catia La Mar, Playa Verde, Playa Grande, Puerto Viejo, 
Las Salinas, La Lucha, Punta de Mulatos and other prioritized locations. The teams comprise general 
practitioners, nurses, pediatricians, an obstetrics and gynecology (OB/GYN) specialist, support staff, 
and mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS) personnel. Between 1 and 8 July 2026, the 
mobile medical units conducted a total of 944 consultations in earthquake- affected communities in 
La Guaira. Non -communicable diseases (NCDs) accounted for the largest proportion of 
consultations (44.3 per cent), followed by communicable diseases (36.3 per cent). Mental health and 
psychosocial support consultations represented 8.1 per cent of all consultations, while sexual and 
reproductive health services accounted for 7.0 per cent and trauma/injury -related consultations for 
4.3 per cent. In addition, IMC continues to support acc ess to safe water through water trucking 
activities and has initiated the deployment of a Type 1 Emergency Medical Team (EMT) in Catia La 
Mar to further strengthen health response capacity. 
 On 10 July 2026, Project Ho pe continued providing health services through health facilities and 
community spaces in La Guaira, Miranda and the Capital District, delivering 184 medical 
consultations, 172 treatment courses and seven Pap smear (PAP) tests. In La Guaira, activities 
focused on the Catia La Mar Baseball Field and Caraballeda, where 81 medical consultations were 
provided, 172 treatments were distributed and seven PAP tests were conducted, contributing to 
timely access to primary health care and preventive services. In addition, the organization provided 
medical consultations in health facilities in the municipalities of Chacao and Libertador, including 
facilities within the public health network, supporting continuity of care for affected populations. 
 Japan will deploy a second contingent of the Japan Disaster Relief (JDR) Medical Team to the 
affected area, comprising personnel from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Japan International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA), as well as registered doctors, nurses and other health professionals. 
 
Logistics and Telecommunications 
 
 Through the Logistics Working Group (LWG), WFP is expanding the no- cost logistics services 
available to humanitarian organizations. In response to requests from partners interested in shipping 
cargo by sea to Puerto Cabello, support will also be provided for onward transportation from the port 
to La Guaira. 
 A PAHO/WHO flight carrying 26 metric tonnes of health supplies to support the emergency response 
landed at Simón Bolívar International Airport in Maiquetía. 
 The Telecommunications sector advanced the installation of a community internet system 
(implemented by Emergency.lu) at César Nieves Stadium, with capacity to serve up to 1,000 users 
and coverage of up to 300 metres. 
.  Nutrition 
 UNICEF conducted nutrition activities at the Playa Grande transitional camp, including nutritional 
screening, infant and young child feeding counselling in emergencies, and micronutrient distribution, 
prioritizing young children, pregnant women and breastfeeding mothers. 
 
 Protection (including Children and Gender-Based Violence) 
  
 UNHCR continued providing legal counselling, psychosocial support, documentation assistance and 
referrals to specialized services in transitional camps in La Guaira. On 13 July, 119 people, including
OCHA | 6 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
children and adolescents, participated in protection activities, legal assistance, case management, 
psychosocial support, counselling and referral services at the Playa Grande, César Nieves Stadium 
and José María Vargas Sports Complex transitional camps. 
 UNFPA continued supporting the protection response in the José María Vargas, César Nieves and 
Playa Grande transitional camps through gender-based violence (GBV) awareness-raising activities, 
reaching 142 people during the reporting period, primarily women, including adolescent girls, 
pregnant women and breastfeeding women. Dignity kits were also distributed at the César N ieves 
camp. 
 In addition, UNFPA provided specialized protection support across the three camps through 13 
psychosocial support interventions, including psychological first aid (PFA), and followed up on one 
GBV case under case management. 
 IOM continued strengthening the management of the José María Vargas temporary camp, providing 
assistance and protection services to 369 families and coordinating, together with UNHCR and the 
state authorities, the relocation of five family groups to alternative accommodation sites in Caracas. 
Planning also advanced for the installation of large-capacity tents at Campo de Golf (Tanaguarena) 
to expand shelter capacity and service delivery. 
 At the César Nieves temporary camp, IOM-led protection screening resulted in 20 referrals to general 
health services and three referrals to Mental Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS) services. 
In addition, three referrals were made to the Ombudsperson's Office. At the Playa Grande temporary 
camp, IOM also facilitated seven referrals to health services and two referrals to psychosocial 
services. Additionally, a Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) session was 
delivered to police officers. 
 UNICEF and its partners provided psychosocial support to 129 children and adolescents and 47 
caregivers across the José María Vargas Sports Complex, César Nieves Stadium and Playa Grande 
temporary camps through activities aimed at strengthening emotional expression, social cohesion, 
protection, positive parenting, prevention of violence and child sexual abuse, early childhood care 
and life skills development. 
 
Shelter and Non-Food Items 
 At the Campo de Golf (Tanaguarena) transitional camp, Fundación Vivienda Popular, with support 
from IOM, distributed 120 non- food item (NFI) kits, including tarpaulins, water storage containers, 
solar lamps, mosquito nets and hygiene kits, to strengthen shelter conditions for affected families. 
 At the Mare Abajo temporary camp, UNHCR supported the installation of 30 solar lamps in 
communal and priority areas of the site to mitigate protection risks and improve safety conditions. 
  
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH)  
 
 UNICEF and its partners maintained WASH interventions across the José María Vargas Sports 
Complex, César Nieves Stadium and Playa Grande transitional camps, including the distribution of 
80,000 litres of safe drinking water, monitoring of water and sanitation services, hygiene promotion 
activities reaching 130 people, provision of sanitation supplies, delivery of four shower units 
(including two adapted for persons with reduced mobility), and solid waste management and 
sanitation facility maintenance activities. 
 At the Campo de Golf (Tanaguarena) transitional camps, IOM coordinated assessments with Action 
Against Hunger (ACF), Solidarités International and other partners to strengthen water, sanitation 
and hygiene services, including needs related to toilets, showers, handwashing facilities, water 
storage and water treatment. 
 According to Caritas data as of 13 July, more than 120,000 litres of safe drinking water had been 
distributed to earthquake-affected communities. 
Humanitarian financing and contributions  
 The United Nations humanitarian chief, Tom Fletcher, announced an additional appeal under the 
Humanitarian Response Plan for Venezuela. The appeal outlines the multisectoral needs of 1.3 
million people over the next six months. To reach those in need, US$298  million is required, in 
addition to the US$632 million requested at the beginning of the year.
OCHA | 7 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 IOM launched a US$98 million appeal to assist 850,000 people and support 140 entities over the 
next six months. PAHO/WHO launched an emergency appeal for nearly US$24 million to support 
health response and early recovery activities over the next six months and released US$1.5 million 
from the Contingency Fund for Emergencies. WFP  launched an initial appeal for US$50 million to 
scale up food assistance and support emergency logistics and communications activities. UNHCR 
requires US$14.8 million to support up to 30,000 affected people over the next six months. 
 The Government of Italy allocated US$5.7 million to support the humanitarian response to the 
earthquakes, helping deliver life-saving assistance, protection and access to essential services for 
affected populations through AICS, WFP and IFRC. 
 Caritas Spain announced an increase in its contribution to €1 million to support the earthquake 
response in Venezuela, including the €300,000 mobilized during the first days of the emergency. 
This support is complemented by the deployment of representatives from Caritas Spain and other 
Caritas network organizations in the country, providing technical and coordination support in WASH, 
food security, livelihoods, risk management and shelter. 
 A new European Union Humanitarian Air Bridge flight landed on 13 July carrying 29 metric tonnes 
of shelter and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) supplies. The cargo included European Union-
funded assistance for IOM, Irish-funded support for GOAL Global, and UNICEF supplies. 
 On 12 July, a shipment from Germany carrying 9.6 metric tonnes of medical supplies, hygiene kits 
and household items was received.  In addition, a shipment carrying 33.9 metric tonnes of 
humanitarian assistance arrived from Türkiye. 
 The Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) allocated US$15 million to support a multisectoral 
response, alongside the activation of the Venezuela Humanitarian Fund (VHF). Norway contributed 
to support the response through CERF. 
 The United States  announced a US$100 million contribution to the VHF, in addition to a further 
US$100 million in bilateral funding for response operations implemented by IOM, WFP, UNICEF, 
International Medical Corps, Catholic Relief Services, Samaritan’s Purse, Proyecto Es peranza and 
the Red Cross. 
 Germany and the Republic of Korea contributed US$5 million and US$1.25 million, respectively, to 
the VHF to support humanitarian action in the country. Other Member States and donors have 
expressed their intention to support the response through the Fund.  
 The Republic of Korea has also provided US$1.25 million to WFP and US$2.5 million to UNICEF to 
support the humanitarian response in Venezuela. 
 Japan allocated US$3.5 million to support the earthquake response. The funding will provide 
humanitarian assistance in key sectors, including food security, health care, shelter and non- food 
items, through WFP, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) 
and IOM. 
 The Royal Netherlands Navy delivered an additional shipment of humanitarian assistance and 
emergency relief supplies to La Guaira as part of a sustained support mechanism from Curaçao that 
has already facilitated five consecutive missions. A new vessel will be deployed to ensu re the 
continuity of these operations and support the delivery of assistance to affected areas. 
 The European Union allocated €5 million to support the emergency response, in addition to the €52 
million already allocated this year for humanitarian operations in the country. 
 Australia announced a US$2 million contribution to support the provision of food, shelter, healthcare 
and access to safe water through IFRC and WFP. 
 Switzerland announced a contribution of CHF 2.5 million to support the response. 
 Sweden allocated SEK 25 million to support the humanitarian response through food assistance, 
water, temporary shelter, protection and family reunification programmes implemented by WFP, 
UNHCR and Save the Children. 
 Denmark announced an additional contribution of DKK 11 million to support the humanitarian 
response, including DKK 10 million through UNHCR and DKK 1 million through DanChurchAid and 
the Danish Red Cross. 
 The Disasters Emergency Committee ( DEC) announced an initial allocation of £7.5 million for the 
earthquake response in Venezuela, including £2 million contributed by the United Kingdom 
Government through UK Aid Match. The funds will be implemented by DEC member agencies and 
their local partners to support the humanitarian response.
OCHA | 8 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 As part of the support provided by UNDAC, the team includes a private sector coordination specialist 
to strengthen business engagement in response and recovery efforts. A private sector contributions 
tracker for the Venezuela earthquake response is available at https://ven-
eq.connectingbusiness.org, together with a briefing note for the private sector outlining opportunities 
for engagement. Focal point: sanchez21@un.org.  
 OCHA continues to coordinate with donors and partners to ensure rapid, strategic and needs-based 
allocation of resources. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact information 
For more information, please contact the OCHA Venezuela Office: 
 
Vanessa May – Head of Office a.i. – mayv@un.org  
Alfonso Zabaleta – Humanitarian Affairs Officer – alfonso.zabaleta@un.org  
Jennifer Moreno – Public Information Officer – moreno7@un.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Support the humanitarian response to address the earthquake in Venezuela 
Make your donation safely and quickly now: 
https://crisisrelief.un.org/en/donate-venezuela-crisis