Ukraine Conflict Monitor 
 Update


Ukraine increases its strikes on Moscow city and region as its own capital remains under constant fire.


1,817 political violence events


6% decrease compared to last week


182 incidents of violence targeting civilians


12% decrease compared to last week


At least 71 civilians killed by targeted violence


15% increase compared to last week




14 Jun.


Yaroslavl, Russia
 — A Ukrainian drone strike on the Kombinat Temp oil storage facility in Rybinsk destroys 15 fuel tanks






15 Jun.


Kharkiv
 — Russian drones kill six people, including five rescue workers, in Kharkiv city






18 Jun.


Odesa
 — Russian drones hit two civilian vessels near Odesa port, killing one civilian and wounding five others




Russian forces claimed to have occupied two settlements north of Pokrovsk and another one east of Kramatorsk in the Donetsk region. Russian forces also captured a settlement between Kupiansk and Borova in the Kharkiv region.


Russian forces launched at least 39 long-range missile and drone attacks, including on Kyiv city and the surrounding region.


Russian strikes killed at least 60 civilians in the Donetsk, Kharkiv, Dnipropetrovsk, Sumy, Kherson, Zaporizhia, and Odesa regions, as well as in Kyiv city. Ukrainian drone strikes reportedly killed nine civilians in the Russian-controlled parts of the Donetsk, Zaporizhia, and Kherson regions, as well as in Crimea.


Ukrainian forces intensified their attacks on Russia’s capital and the surrounding Moscow region by launching several waves of drone attacks throughout the week. In Moscow city, Ukrainian drones, as well as 
the Russian air defense system missiles
 that were activated to intercept these drones, struck the Moscow Oil Refinery on 15 and 18 June, 
engulfing the city in black smoke
. The facility 
supplies over a third
 of the Moscow region’s fuel and fuel for Moscow’s airports. Ukrainian drones and drone debris also damaged residential buildings and a food production facility in the Moscow region located 600 meters away from a defense-affiliated enterprise. One civilian was killed, and at least 22 others were injured as a result of these attacks. Russian air defense systems were activated every day of the week to intercept Ukrainian drones in the region. They intercepted hundreds of drones in total.


Ukrainian strikes on Russia’s capital and Moscow region began escalating 
shortly after the Victory Day ceasefire in May
. While single-digit Ukrainian drones were often intercepted in the Moscow region previously, with some of the drone debris occasionally causing damage or casualties, few strikes were big enough to hit targets or cause disruptions. ACLED records an average of four drone strikes on Moscow city and region per month in 2025, mostly causing minor and contained damage, in contrast to nearly 40 events between 1 May and 19 June. Overall, most of Ukraine’s long-range strikes on Russia this year have been concentrated on energy sector facilities and military sites. Ambitious attacks on these targets are likely to continue to escalate, reaching targets further from the front line and hitting Moscow city and region, as Ukraine increases drone production and overwhelms Russia’s air defense.


Meanwhile, despite 
threatening escalation
 in response to Ukraine’s strikes on Moscow, Russia will struggle to further increase pressure on Ukraine, as it has been continuously pummeling Ukrainian cities to date, regardless of Ukraine’s attacks. Russia conducted a monthly average of nearly 35 strikes on Kyiv city and region from January 2025 to mid-June 2026 — a trend that follows Russia’s campaign of 
predominantly targeting population centers
 with long-range attacks. On 15 June, Russian drones and missiles struck residential areas, an educational institution, and the Kyiv-Pechersk Lavra historic monastery in Kyiv city, killing five civilians and wounding nearly 50 others. On the same day and later in the week, Russian drones and missiles also struck several settlements in the eponymous region, causing further damage to civilian infrastructure.