FACTS & FIGURES OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS IN LIBYA
January - December – 2025
In 2025, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in Libya has continued its humanitarian response to address the con-
sequences of armed conflict and armed violence, and to support people affected by it, such as separated families, missing, detained 
or displaced people.
The work has been defined by cooperation, capacity building, and material and infrastructure support in the fields of health, physical 
rehabilitation, hygiene, water access and forensics. The ICRC continued to provide productive grants and business training to con-
flict-affected households to foster their financial autonomy.
Key to our endeavor is ICRC’s role as guardian of International Humanitarian Law (IHL), the law of armed conflicts, in the terms 
entrusted to the ICRC by all States in the Geneva Conventions, which Libya ratified in 1956.
The work has only been possible through the cooperation and support of the Libyan Red Crescent Society (LRCS) as well as the 
backing of the relevant authorities.
Hereunder, in actions and numbers, our work during 2025.
Protection – Restoring family contact:
The ICRC continued its efforts to restore and maintain family links between families separated by armed conflict, violence, and migra-
tion. These efforts included detainees, unaccompanied minors, and other vulnerable adults. In line with its mandate under the Geneva 
Conventions, the ICRC engaged in bilateral, confidential dialogue with the relevant authorities.
In its neutral intermediary capacity, the ICRC engaged with West and East representatives as chair of the “International Humanitarian 
Law (IHL) and Humanitarian Working Group” – which seeks to clarify the fate of people missing in relation to the conflict in Libya and 
provide answers to their families.
The ICRC regularly facilitates the exchange of lists of missing persons, seeks feedback on their fate and whereabouts, in addition to 
collecting data on unidentified/unclaimed human remains. 
Libya
Since the creation of the Working Group in 2019: 
Protection of Family Links (PFL) program - the ICRC 
facilitated:
3172  
persons
79  
Red Cross 
Messages
85 
missing cases 
38 
LRCS 
volunteers  
36
phone calls 
reported as missing by their 
families continue to be sought 
by the ICRC in Libya.
(RCMs) and Salamat (oral 
greetings).  
were resolved positively.
and staff members were trained to strengthen their capacities to 
offer PFL services. 
were offered.
13 
working group 
61  
families
meetings have taken place. received news about their loved ones, whose whereabouts remained 
unknown for years.
The ICRC continued its confidential and bilateral dialogue with Libyan authorities and institutions to raise attention and provide rec-
ommendations on humanitarian issues such as the protection of civilians and the needs of the families of missing persons, including 
detainees, migrants and refugees, internally displaced persons (IDPs), the wounded and sick and the medical missions.
the Forensic Department of the ICRC in Libya conducting 
a comprehensive three-day training for 11 officers who 
are first responders from the Criminal Investigation 
Department, the Coast Guard, and the Environmental 
Police in Tripoli.
Forensic services: the ICRC has continued to 
strengthen the capacity of the medico-legal system 
and institutions involved in the Management of the 
Dead (MoTD) through the following activities:
 • 2 MoTD training sessions were conducted on the 
management of the deceased for the Criminal 
Investigation Department (CID), one in Sabha and 
one in Tripoli, with a total of 28 participants.
 • Human Remain Recovery Team (HRRT) training 
for the Ministry of Interior (MoI) at the Technical 
School Administration of the General Directorate, 
Tripoli, with a total number of 11 participants.
 • HRRT training for the CID Benghazi branch, with a 
total number of 17 participants.
 • 2 awareness sessions on the proper management 
of the dead to the LRCS (eastern and western 
regions) in a joint course with the PFL training.
 • Engagement continued with relevant authorities 
on the MoTD file, including the Systems and 
Information Department of the Ministry of 
Defense (Tripoli), CID Benghazi branch, and the 
General Authority for Research and Identification 
of Missing Persons (GASIMP).
 • Donation of materials to CID Benghazi, Sabha, 
GASIMP, Sabha Medical Center morgue, Murzuk 
General Hospital morgue, Emergency Medicine 
and Support Center (EMSC) Tripoli, and LRCS HQ 
to support the recovery and management of the 
deceased.
Places of detention (PoDs):
 • ICRC conducted three detention visits to places of detention under the authority of the Military Police in Tripoli and 
Misrata. These were carried out in line with the ICRC’s mandate and right of initiative under Common Article 3 of the 
Geneva Conventions, as well as in the Statutes of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement. The ICRC 
engaged in bilateral and confidential dialogue with the relevant authorities and provided its recommendations accordingly.
 • ICRC continues to offer its strictly humanitarian services to visit detainees in places of detention, including the 
Correctional and Rehabilitation Institutions under the responsibility of the Ministry of Justice.
11
facilities 
29 
facilities 
609
consultations
 • (primary health care centers (PHCCs)) were 
supported through the provision of drugs and 
medical materials during 2025. These facilities 
carried out around 1,019,089 consultations, out of 
which 109,861 consultations were for children under 
5 years old.
 • In general, 29 health facilities were provided with 
drugs and consumables, out of which 11 are regularly 
supported PHCCs, 8 ad-hoc supported PHCCs, and 10 
ad-hoc supported hospitals. 
 • In collaboration with LRCS, the ICRC supported four 
medical convoys (a small and temporary mobile clinic) 
in Kufra and Aubari area. The medical convoys provided 
609 consultations to various age groups, including 
women and children.
 • In addition, ICRC provided First Aid 
Trainings (FAT) - basic and advanced 
- to 416 participants (weapon bearers 
in East and West).
 • A Training of Trainers (ToT) FAT course 
for LRCS FAT trainers was financially 
supported by ICRC to increase the 
pool of LRCS ToT FAT trainers. 13 
participants from LRCS branches of 
southern Libya were enrolled in the 
course, which took place in Sabha.
 • The ICRC provided financial support 
to the LRCS to enable ToT FAT 
trainers, trained during three first aid 
ToT courses in Tripoli, Benghazi, and 
Sabha, to conduct 15 FAT courses for 
their branch volunteers, benefiting 
270 participants.
 • ICRC continued its close coordination 
with Ministry of Health authorities on 
various health projects: digitization 
of the Integrated Management of 
Childhood Illnesses (ALMANACH) - 
an innovative digital clinical decision 
support system that provides real-
time diagnostic and therapeutic 
support to health care providers 
in fragile settings through mobile 
technology. In addition to providing 
clinical decision support, ALMANACH 
enables health care managers and 
senior public health decision-makers 
to access aggregated clinical data 
from the sites where the program is 
used. 
 • ALMANACH project was fully 
implemented in Suleiman Khater, Hay 
Al Mujahedeen PHCCs (both located 
in Tripoli), Al Sabri polyclinic (located 
in Benghazi), Al Khoms polyclinic, 
and Sirte polyclinic, while efforts to 
launch the project in additional health 
facilities are continuing.
Health: Treating and caring for the sick and wounded 
during armed conflicts and other situations of 
violence, making sure people are at the center of all 
considerations, ensuring the continuation of medical 
services and helping consolidate public health 
structures:
795  
Persons with disabilities 
4  
Centers 
2025  
Handover
ICRC provided material assistance, technical support, and capacity 
building (i.e. on-the-job training) to four physical rehabilitation 
centers (PRCs) in Janzour (Tripoli), Misrata, Benghazi, as well as the 
prosthetics and orthotics center at Abu Salim Incidents Hospital 
in Tripoli, where 795 persons with disabilities received various 
services, including prosthetics, orthotics, physiotherapy, and walking 
aids.
ICRC supported the four centers with prosthetic & orthotic, 
physiotherapy material, tools, equipment, and technical support. 
ICRC’s material support consisted of imported material to 
manufacture artificial limbs and orthotic devices, including high-
quality German Otto Bock technology. ICRC also supported the 
Rehabilitation and Physiotherapy Centre of the Southern Region in 
Sabha with a donation of physiotherapy equipment, stump socks, 
and walking aids.
Throughout 2025, ICRC has provided technical support to ICRC-
assisted centers through on-the-job training, coaching and 
mentoring to assist them in establishing a store/stock management 
system to ultimately enable them to manage their supply chain 
independently, after the ICRC Physical Rehabilitation Program (PRP) 
ends in 2025.
Support to persons with disabilities:
12
Trainers
10 
Individuals
1
Student
ICRC delivered one ToT on Career 
Development Program (CDP), the 
second of its kind in 2025, for 12 
trainers from the Libyan Paralympic 
Committee (LPC) to build its 
capacity, enabling it to undertake the 
responsibility of the CDP training. 
The CDP training is instrumental in 
empowering individuals, including 
athletes and non-athletes with 
physical disabilities, to enhance their 
job acquisition skills and increase 
their employment opportunities.
10 individuals who attended 
the CDP ToTs were referred to 
the ICRC Economic Security 
Department and benefited from a 
two-week Business Skills Training.
With ICRC sponsorship, one 
student is pursuing a four-and-
a-half-year bachelor’s program in 
prosthetics and orthotics in India.
4  
Individuals 
97  
Persons
10 
Staff members
from the LPC benefited from a 
four-session sport virtual training 
facilitated by the global ICRC PRP 
advisor for disability and sport 
inclusion, in collaboration with a 
non-ICRC specialist.
Since 2017, the ICRC has provided 
financial support and regular 
donations of sports wheelchairs 
to the LPC, enabling 97 persons 
with disabilities to practice 
sports.
ICRC sponsored short in-country 
trainings for three new staff members 
from ICRC-assisted centers on 
leadership, store/stock management, 
and data entry management. In total, 
10 staff members benefited from this 
ICRC support in 2025.
Training of Trainers (TOT) at Abu Salem Hospital 
aims to build the capacity of local staff during 
the handover and closure phase of the Physical 
Rehabilitation Program (PRP) of the ICRC in 
Libya.
Yaseen ALSUWAYAH/ICRC
Water & Sanitation work: Ensuring proper access to 
water & sanitation for health and public infrastructures. 
Providing technical assistance and capacity building to 
water utilities and concerned authorities:
In close coordination with the Libyan national water and sanitation authorities and the LRCS, the ICRC’s activities in Libya play a key 
role in enhancing partners’ capacity for emergency preparedness and response, while continuing to support national efforts to restore 
essential infrastructure and reinforce institutional systems.
These combined efforts aim to ensure sustainable access to safe water and adequate sanitation for communities affected by conflict.
In 2025, an estimated 1.5 million people nationwide benefited directly (414,598 people) or indirectly (1.2 million) from improved access 
to safe water, sanitation, and healthcare services, addressing immediate needs while strengthening institutional resilience.
Targeted interventions in Tarhouna, Sirte, and Al Hisha improved sanitation services for an estimated 115,000 people.
Successful completion and official handover of Benghazi Sanitation Master Plan, together with all supporting technical documentation, 
contributing to the city’s reconstruction strategy and expansion of safe, reliable sanitation services for nearly 800,000 persons, 
helping to end decades of untreated sewage discharge. Furthermore, the diagnostic analysis and redesign of the Sidi Mansur 2 well 
field and Benina water system study benefited 100,000 residents in Benghazi. This comprehensive engineering study addresses 
Benghazi’s reliance on a single water source, ensuring security and supply continuity during emergencies.
 • An emergency delivery of ductile pipe to restore wastewater discharge in Tarhouna, restoring service for 
20,000 residents.
 • Rehabilitation of the Tarhouna Wastewater Pumping Station, restoring service to around 20,000 residents. 
 • Rehabilitation of Sirte’s Main Wastewater Pumping Station (PS1), increasing operational capacity from 20% to 
80%, benefiting approximately 70,000 people.
 • Rehabilitation of the General Company for Water and Wastewater (GCWW) Al Hisha’s truck maintenance 
workshop, increasing emergency readiness from 0% to 90%, and strengthening service reliability for about 
25,000 individuals. 
The intervention included:
A field tour of a number of projects 
previously implemented by the ICRC within 
the municipality of Tarhuna, including the 
rehabilitation of sewage networks, support for 
environmental sanitation management, and the 
development of a water quality laboratory.
Yaseen ALSUWAYAH/ICRC
As part of the ICRC’s commitment for institutional support to local authorities acting in the water and sanitation sector, a range of 
projects were implemented across the country. This included the rehabilitation of critical facilities such as laboratories, workshops, 
and warehouses, in addition to the provision of essential equipment, tools, and lab reagents. To name a few, ICRC contributed to the 
rehabilitation of the GCWW middle eastern region workshop in Sirte, increasing the operational capacity to over 80%, benefiting 
8,000 people directly and approximately 287,000 people indirectly.
Roughly 67,000 people in Sinawin and Mizdah areas benefited from the improvement in water supply and sanitation services pro-
vided by GCWW. This improvement follows the donation of essential tools and spare parts supplied by ICRC. In addition, ICRC sup-
ported the rehabilitation of Tarhouna environmental and sanitation administrative laboratory and offices, and provided support to 
GCWW Kufra laboratory and maintenance team, restoring the only functioning laboratory in Al-Wahat region and ensuring safe water 
for 64,000 people including Sudanese refugees. With the ICRC’s support to GCWW Misrata water quality laboratory, the only water 
lab in the middle region covering urban centers such as Misrata, Zliten, and Bani Walid, a population of approximately 420,000 ben-
efited from the support with lab equipment, reagents, spare parts, and consumables, in addition to the installation of solar system 
that increased the lab overall capacity from 10 to 60 water tests per day. In Benghazi, the rehabilitation of Benina chlorine storage 
facility that was heavily affected by the conflict and the support to Sidi Mansur water quality lab improved the safety standards and 
monitoring capacity, serving 135,000 people. This support was further enhanced by the provision of reagents and consumables to 
the Man-Made River Authority (MMRA) laboratory, safeguarding the primary water source for 1.1 million people.
ICRC also launched a structured needs-based capacity-building program to strengthen the ability of local water and sanitation 
authorities to respond effectively to emergencies and maintain service continuity. In total, 47 public employees and collaborators 
from across the country benefited from this program. In addition, 25 senior managers and engineers from several institutions 
received advanced training on Crisis Management and Emergency Response for Utilities in Amman, Jordan. Also, 23 engineers from 
key institutions completed a specialized training in Basic Hydraulics and Water System Diagnostics in Tripoli and Benghazi. These 
efforts have enhanced national expertise in emergency preparedness and equipped institutions to better safeguard essential services 
during emergencies.
In the healthcare sector, collaboration with the Ministry of Health enhanced access for over 1.3 million people. Projects included 
expanding Sirte’s Ibn Sina Hospital morgue by a 65% capacity increase, rehabilitating Zintan’s Al-Sharqi PHC, benefiting 10,000 
people, and the comprehensive rehabilitation of Benghazi’s Al-Jalaa Hospital morgue, the only functioning facility in eastern Libya.
Finally, a total of 63 LRCS volunteers and HQ staff benefited from targeted capacity building trainings. For example,  the Water, 
Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) Program Manager participated in a specialized training on Water and Sanitation in Emergencies in 
Switzerland, and 60 volunteers from branches nationwide completed Hygiene Promotion and WASH Assessment Training through 
two regional workshops conducted in Benghazi and Tripoli.
a specialized course on the fundamentals 
of hydraulics and the assessment of water 
networks, and the participants in this course 
are from various official entities, including 
the Ministry of Water Resources, the General 
Company for Water and Sanitation, in addition 
to the General Desalination Company.
Narmin Elfurjani/ICRC
573 
individuals
834 
vulnerable individuals
Vocational trainings helped 573 individuals 
gain access to income generating skills 
(such as sewing, electrical maintenance) 
to help vulnerable conflict affected 
households compete in the labor market 
and contribute to their income generation. 
In 2025, 143 individuals benefited from 
these vocational trainings in Tripoli, 142 in 
Benghazi and Derna (67 & 75 respectively), 
166 in Misrata, and 122 in Sabha.
ICRC’s Microeconomic Initiative (MEI) program has 
enabled 834 vulnerable individuals to improve 
their economic security, through the delivery of 
productive grants. Conflict-affected beneficiaries 
are long-term IDPs and/or have disabled or missing 
family members, and productive grants in the form of 
conditional cash have allowed beneficiaries to start 
or consolidate their own businesses. The creation 
of community committees (community leaders 
and municipalities) has been instrumental to the 
successful implementation of the program, together 
with the close cooperation with the LRCS.
Economic Security (EcoSec) – Helping the most 
vulnerable achieve self-sustainability:
Capacity building – Reducing risks during emergencies
The ICRC supports LRCS and local government structures to increase their knowledge and capacities in areas classified as critical.
A total of 385 staff from five government institutions benefitted from certified training programs provided by selected training institu-
tions. This included 224 staff from the Ministry of Technical and Vocational Education (MTVE) in Benghazi, Derna, and Sabha, 22 staff 
from the Ministry of Social Affairs (MoSA) in Benghazi, and 30 staff from the Ministry of Social Affairs (MoSA) in Misrata, 78 staff from 
the Ministry of Local Governance (MoLG) in Tripoli, Tarhuna, and Misrata, and 31 staff from Tumina Training Center. The training pro-
grams were tailored to address specific needs and covered topics such as advanced ToT, statistical analysis using Statistical Package 
for the Social Sciences (SPSS), Project Management Professional (PMP), and crisis management.
ICRC’s EcoSec team supported 312 LRCS volunteers/staff located and operating in ICRC priority zones, including Tripoli, Zawiya, Mis-
rata, Al-Kufra, Benghazi, Sabha, Zliten and Al-Khoms with capacity building, and by providing various trainings through selected service 
providers, as per their training needs. These trainings included crisis management, data collection and analysis, team leadership, PMP, 
and report writing.
385 
Staff
312 
LRCS volunteers
from five government institutions 
benefitted from certified training programs 
provided by selected training institutions.
located and operating in ICRC priority zones, 
including Tripoli, Zawiya, Misrata, Al-Kufra, Benghazi, 
Sabha, Zliten and Al-Khoms, were supported with 
capacity building, and by providing various trainings.
A session on International Humanitarian Law (IHL) 
was conducted as part of a training of trainers (TOT) 
program organized by the Physical Rehabilitation 
Program (PRP) at the ICRC delegation in Libya.
Yaseen ALSUWAYAH/ICRC
International Humanitarian Law (IHL) – Awareness and 
respect:
ICRC continues to promote understanding and respect for IHL among authorities, armed forces, academic circles, community 
leaders and the media, helping to create an environment that supports both the protection of those affected by armed conflict 
and effective application and implementation of treaty-based and customary IHL.
 • January and February: 9 officers from Tripoli and 7 from Benghazi participated in 2 ToT workshops on IHL, that focused 
on the key messages to be delivered in IHL trainings as well as presentation techniques and methods.
 • April: one senior officer from Benghazi was sponsored to attend the Senior Workshop on International Rules Governing 
Police Operations (SWIRPO) in Colombia with the participation of over 60 senior police leaders from 63 countries. This 
edition focused primarily on the humanitarian aspects of early detention following police operations. 
 • May: 16 officials of the House of Representatives participated in a 3-day workshop on IHL in Benghazi. Several 
parliamentary committees participated, including members from the Legislative and Constitutional Committee, the 
General Liberties and Human Rights Committee, the Defence and National Security Committee, and the Internal Affairs 
Committee. The workshop covered issues regarding the definition, applicability and implementation of IHL, IHL and Islam, 
the difference and interaction between IHL and human rights and the challenges of contemporary armed conflicts.
 • August: Libya joined the Global Initiative to Galvanize Political Commitment to International Humanitarian Law launched by 
Brazil, China, France, Jordan, Kazakhstan and South Africa, together with the ICRC. See: www.upholdhumanityinwar.org. 
 • August: ICRC met with the Secretary General of the National Committee of IHL Tripoli.
 • September: 15 officers from the Electronic Aviation Authority under the authorities of the West received a 3-day 
workshop on IHL.
• October: ICRC met with the IHL Coordinator of the Military Prosecutor’s Office of the Libyan Arab Armed Forces (LAAF) 
under the authorities of the East, after his attendance to the Advanced Seminar on IHL in Geneva.
 • October: 15 officers from the Command-and-Control Force under the authorities of the West received a 3-day workshop 
on IHL. 
 • October: ICRC met with the focal point of the House of Representatives to identify joint work and strengthening IHL 
capabilities. 
 • October: joint ICRC/LRCS IHL ToT addressed to 9 focal points of the LRCS from 9 branches in Libya.
 • November: four high-level officials attended the IHL Regional Course in Luxor-Egypt sponsored and organised by the ICRC, 
including the Ministry of Foreign Affairs under authorities in the East, the House of Representatives, and the Ministry of 
Higher Education under the authorities in the West. 
 • November: two officials under the authorities of the West and the East attended the IHL Advanced Course in San Remo, 
Italy. 
 • November: one expert from the House of Representatives attended an online Expert Meeting on the Missing and Islamic 
Law organized by the ICRC HQ Legal Division.
 • December: LRCS volunteers form several branches received a session on IHL and international weapons treaties as part of 
the weapon contamination training for LRCS.
 • December: members of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs under the authorities in the East received an IHL training as part of 
the IHL & communication training initiative.
Weapon Contamination (WeC) – Preventing risks:
405
Face-to-Face
20,110 
Individuals
20,419 
material
risk awareness sessions 1,185 of which were non-Libyans (leaflets and posters for adults 
and children)
The ICRC continued its efforts to protect communities affected by weapon contamination through risk education, risk reduction, and 
support to national authorities and partner organizations engaged in clearance activities.
The ICRC provided financial support, material assistance, and technical guidance to the joint LRCS Risk Awareness & Safer Behavior 
(RASB) program in Tripoli, Benghazi, and Derna. Previously trained and accredited LRCS volunteers and a WeC focal point were sup-
ported by the ICRC in conducting field activities across the three cities.
With the ICRC’s support, the LRCS conducted 405 face-to-face risk awareness sessions, reaching a total of 20,110 individuals, 
1,185 of which were non-Libyans. This included several Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) with community representatives on weapon 
contamination risks and safer behavior practices, and a total of 20,419 material (leaflets and posters for adults and children) were 
distributed among the beneficiaries.
• Development of risk education materials tailored to the Libyan context and aligned with the Libyan Mine Action 
Center (LibMAC) and international mine action standards, to ensure consistent and effective messaging across all 
awareness initiatives.
 • 6 billboards were installed in Tripoli to increase public visibility and awareness.
 • Production and broadcasting of a series of 5 audio stories illustrating real-life scenarios involving explosive risks 
in Benghazi and Tripoli. These were aired on Radio Do FM, reaching a broad audience through 10 daily broadcasts, 
aiming to improve public understanding and promote safer behavior in contaminated areas. 
 • 6 tablets, stationery, danger signs and leaflets were donated to LRCS teams.
 • Training on Information Management System of Mine Action (IMSMA Platform) for 17 participants.
 • 21 new volunteers from Sirte, Sabha and Kufra were trained on RASB and IMSMA platform. The training was done 
in collaboration with LibMAC and the ICRC’s IHL and communication colleagues.
 • WeC sessions also constituted an integral part of the first aid trainings delivered by ICRC to several authorities, 
including Internal Security, Benina Airport Authority, LAAF, as well as MoI, CID and Coastal Security. This reached 
173 individuals, including 19 females. 
Key activities and donations:
Specialized training:
Alla Elhusk/ICRC
An RASB training for four 
volunteers from the LRCS in 
Tripoli, with the attendence of 
LibMAC and UNMAS.
54  
communication 
sessions
1,005
people
participants
Introductory session on the 
International Committee of the Red 
Cross (ICRC) and its operations in 
Libya, as part of the communication 
training organized for the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs in Benghazi.
Yaseen ALSUWAYAH/ICRC
 • 54 communication / information sessions were provided for various health and military entities on the ICRC’s 
mandate and activities, as well as for the LRCS. 1,005 people participated in these sessions.
 • The Communication Department conducted two IHL and communication trainings for the media team within 
the National Media Corporation, and the journalists and photojournalists at Al-Sabaah Platform, covering topics 
including IHL, humanitarian reporting, photojournalism, drafting press releases, and harmful information.
 • The Communication Department conducted one IHL and communication training for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
under the authorities in the east. This training covered key topics such as IHL, the protection of journalists under 
IHL, humanitarian reporting, and harmful information.   
 • Supported other departments in delivering operational communication sessions, to promote a better 
understanding of the ICRC and its history, highlighting its roles within the International Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement, and familiarizing individuals and communities with the ICRC’s mandate and activities in Libya. 
 • The Communication Department continued its efforts in promoting and raising awareness of IHL and respecting 
the rules of war in times of conflict and other situations of violence.
 • ICRC communicated about the humanitarian situation, the impact of humanitarian aid on people, highlighting their 
needs and resilience. It continued to communicate about ICRC’s ongoing operations through social media and 
digital channels.
 • The ICRC continues engaging with media entities to discuss key topics such as IHL, ethical journalism, and 
reporting in emergencies.
Communication - Engaging with the public, building 
trust in the ICRC to facilitate its humanitarian action and 
reflecting the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement’s 
fundamental principles:
A coordination meeting 
was held at the 
Secretariat between the 
Libyan Red Crescent 
and the ICRC to 
strengthen humanitarian 
cooperation and 
coordination.
Islam Rahim/LRCS
Cooperation – Partnership with the Libyan Red Crescent 
Society (LRCS)
The LRCS and the ICRC are part of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement. The LRCS is the primary partner of the 
ICRC, enhancing its capacity to implement humanitarian action. The ICRC remains committed to continuing its support to the LRCS 
institutional, financial, and operational capacities and to optimize its preparedness in case of emergency operations and response.
 • Annual operational and cooperation agreements in the different domains of collaboration between the ICRC and 
LRCS were signed. In addition, financial, administrative and human resources procedures were agreed upon and 
signed for 2025-2026.
 • Contributions to the salaries of 30 core positions as well as the running costs of various departments at LRCS 
HQ.
 • Two trainings on Safer Access Framework (SAF) and IHL were conducted for 38 branch managers, covering all 
branches nationwide. These sessions aimed to enhance participants’ understanding of the core principles of the 
SAF and its practical application in complex and insecure environments. The sessions also aimed to explore how 
the SAF can support LRCS staff and volunteers in strengthening their operational capacity and preparedness to 
respond to humanitarian challenges.
 • 122 volunteers from different branches countrywide benefited from SAF orientation sessions.
 • Provided financial and technical support to Storm Daniel lessons learned and drill training exercise organized by 
the LRCS. ICRC further donated 1375 uniforms to the National Society. 
 • Donation of 120 individual emergency response kits to support the newly established LRCS National Emergency 
Response Team.
 • Donation of 3 desktop computers and 4 printers to support LRCS branches of Al Khoms, Yefren, Al-Shati, and 
Ghat, along with the Branches Management Department at LRCS HQ.
 • Twenty-two (22) saloon vehicles, one (1) bus, fifteen (15) generators, fuel tanks and a set of electronic/
information and communication technology (ICT) devices have been donated to LRCS to strengthen its 
institutional resilience, emergency preparedness, and operational reach.
 • Financial support to the National Society Development (NSD) workshop organized in Tripoli, benefiting 41 focal 
persons from different branches across Libya.
Institutional, financial, technical and in-kind support was provided for the joint ICRC-LRCS program activities:
04.2026  Cover photo: Yaseen ALSUWAYAH
 • 130 trucks were used to transport humanitarian aid. 
 • 20 air-shipments were received in Libya, containing humanitarian aid, varying between LRCS uniforms, ICT and 
publications.
During the performance of humanitarian activities and delivery of assistance:
Logistics - Enabling ICRC’s activities in Libya 
ICRC Delegation in Libya
Tripoli
Ibrahim Al-Huni Street - Al-Nofleen, Tripoli, Libya
Telephone:  +218 213409921
Email: tri_tripoli@icrc.org
Benghazi
Hay Al-Naseem Street - Tabalino, Benghazi, Libya
Telephone:  +218 912090725
Email: tri_tripoli@icrc.org  
Sabha
Secondary Ring Road, near the Social Solidarity Fund.
 www.icrc.org
 https://www.facebook.com/ICRCly
 https://twitter.com/ICRC_lby
© ICRC, April 2026