Highlights


UN Relief Chief 
tells Security Council
 that Gaza civilians cannot wait for diplomacy, while in the West Bank, a decades-long deterioration is accelerating rapidly.


Further encroachment of the “Yellow Line” triggers 
new displacement
 as Israeli troops advance towards populated areas of Gaza city, marking the revised route with cement blocks.


A reduction in 
fuel inflows
 forces humanitarian partners to prioritize the most life-saving services, further limiting overall efforts.


Over 520 endoscopic and 
surgical procedures
 are at risk of being suspended unless new supplies of high-level disinfectant agents urgently enter Gaza.


In the 
West Bank
, two Palestinian herding families were displaced for a second time since the beginning of 2026 following escalating settler attacks near Birzeit, highlighting a broader trend that has displaced over 2,200 Palestinians, including more than 1,000 children, this year.


By the end of May, humanitarian partners had reported 
230 access incidents
 across the West Bank, where checkpoints, road closures and other movement restrictions continue to impede aid delivery and humanitarian operations.


Humanitarian partners continue to report growing protection and psychosocial support needs across the West Bank, while health partners report ongoing access constraints and attacks affecting health-care delivery.


Overview


Across the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OPT), civilians continue to face insecurity, displacement and constrained access to essential services, while humanitarian partners operate under growing access restrictions and operational uncertainty. Essential systems remain under pressure, protection risks are high, and damage to infrastructure as well as poor living conditions are compounding vulnerabilities.


Briefing the Security-Council on 18 June
, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator Tom Fletcher, paid tribute to humanitarian workers who have made progress since the announcement of a ceasefire on 10 October 2025. At the same time, he warned that “Gaza is being held together by humanitarian workarounds and Palestinian perseverance,” which is unsustainable. “Palestinians in Gaza remain deprived of the basics that you would all demand for your own families: safety, shelter, clean water, health care, education,” he said.


UN Relief Chief noted that “Too many Palestinians are being squeezed into an ever-shrinking strip of land. Their lives are shaped by the indignity of constantly shifting ‘yellow’ and ‘orange’ lines that define where they can seek refuge.”


Speaking of the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, Mr Fletcher warned that “a decades-long deterioration is accelerating rapidly, characterized by calls from Israeli officials for Palestinian ‘voluntary migration’ and an intensification of discriminatory policies and practices.” In this context, he mentioned the high level of settler attacks and their impact so far in 2026.


He called for humanitarian “
funding
 that is timely, flexible and commensurate with the scale of this crisis” and for the cessation of measures that "appear aimed at altering the demographic composition of the Occupied Palestinian Territory in violation of international law,” listing forced displacement, destruction of homes and other property, land confiscation, and movement restrictions.






Disclaimer




UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs


To learn more about OCHA's activities, please visit https://www.unocha.org/.