Home
                    


 







                        Middle East
                    








Live


Middle East live: US launches strikes on Iran after ships attacked in Strait of Hormuz






Issued on: 
07/07/2026 - 23:46
Modified: 
08/07/2026 - 01:40
 

















                FILE PHOTO: Oil tanker Odessa carries UAE crude after passing through the Strait of Hormuz with its Automatic Identification System transponder turned off on May 8, 2026.        © Kim Soo-hyeon, Reuters    
 









                                The United States launched new strikes on Iran early Wednesday after three merchant ships were hit in the Strait of Hormuz, escalating tensions and threatening a fragile ceasefire aimed at ending the war and reopening the key global shipping route. Follow our liveblog for the latest updates.            












08/07/2026 - 01:40
Hegseth planning to visit Israel on Wednesday






08/07/2026 - 00:34
US strikes targeted Iranian air defences and missile systems


The latest US strikes in Iran targeted Iranian air defence systems, coastal surveillance systems, surface-to-air missiles, anti-ship cruise missiles and drone launch sites, a US official told Reuters on Tuesday, speaking on condition of anonymity.






08/07/2026 - 00:10
Iran FM says US attacks violate treaty, warns of 'decisive' action


Iran's foreign ministry said on Tuesday that the United States had repeatedly violated their agreed memorandum of understanding, and warned of retaliation following Washington's strikes on targets in the Strait of Hormuz.
"Iran is issuing a serious warning about the consequences of America's breach of the treaty, and will take decisive measures to protect its interests and national security," the ministry said in a statement posted to Telegram by IRIB News.






08/07/2026 - 00:10
Oil prices rise as Iran tensions escalate in Strait of Hormuz


Oil prices settled 3% higher on Tuesday and extended gains after settlement, following Iran's attacks on three commercial vessels in the Strait of Hormuz, the US revoking a general licence authorising the sale of Iranian crude, and later launching new strikes against Iran.






08/07/2026 - 00:08
US launches strikes on Iran after attacks on ships in Strait of Hormuz


The US military launched new strikes against Iran early Wednesday, hours after three merchant ships were struck in the Strait of Hormuz, in the latest exchange of fire to threaten the interim deal to end the fighting between the two countries.
The renewed attacks were sure to add to the difficulty of the negotiations aimed at fully reopening the strait, rolling back Tehran’s disputed nuclear programme and reaching a permanent end to the war launched on February 28.
In a statement posted to social media, US Central Command said American forces launched the strikes “to impose heavy costs for targeting and attacking commercial shipping crewed by innocent civilians in an international waterway.”
“Iran’s demonstrated aggression was unwarranted, dangerous, and a clear violation of the ceasefire,” the command said in its statement.






08/07/2026 - 00:07
 
Welcome to the France 24 liveblog covering events in the Middle East. You can catch up on recent developments 
here
.








Yesterday's key developments:
 
• The United States reimposed 
sanctions
 on Iranian 
oil
, warning Tehran would face consequences over attacks on vessels in the 
Strait of Hormuz
.
 
• The body of Iran's supreme leader 
Ali Khamenei
 arrived in Iraq ahead of funeral processions through the holy Shia cities of Najaf and Karbala, where 
millions of mourners
 are expected to pay their respects at some of Islam's most revered shrines.
 
• Israeli Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu
 said that he and US President 
Donald Trump
 remain aligned on the key issues surrounding 
Iran
, insisting the two leaders "see eye to eye" on how to deal with Tehran.
 
(FRANCE 24 with Reuters, AP and AFP)












Keywords for this article