Keith Bass


Assistant Secretary of War for Health Affairs




|




















 






Keith Bass is the principal advisor to the Secretary of War and the Under Secretary of War for Personnel and Readiness for all health and force health protection policies, programs, and activities. He leads the Military Health System, a worldwide health care network that provides services to 9.5 million beneficiaries, including active duty service members, military retirees, and their families.


Prior to this role, Bass was Medical Center Director for West Texas VA Health Care System, Veterans Integrated Service Network 17, where he managed health care services for more than 24,000 Veterans, an operating budget of $153 million, and 1,120 employees.


As Director of the White House Medical Unit, Bass planned and supervised delivery of medical care to the President, the Vice President, and their families across three presidential administrations.


Bass was the first non-physician Director of the Office of Medical Services at the Central Intelligence Agency, where he led multidisciplinary teams of clinicians providing health services to a global workforce of over 30,000 and managed an annual budget of more than $80 million.


Prior to his government service, Bass was the Senior Vice President, Business and Clinical Development Executive at GlobalMed in Vienna, Virginia. He helped lead the company’s advanced virtual patient care programs and telehealth services providing support to the Department of Defense, Department of Veterans Affairs, and the White House.


Bass is a retired U.S. Navy commander and a member of the American College of Healthcare Executives, the National Rehabilitation Association, the American Counseling Association, and the National Association of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors.


Bass earned a Bachelor of Arts in psychology and a Bachelor of Arts in rehabilitation science from Arkansas Tech University; a Master of Science in rehabilitation counseling from University of Arkansas; a Master of Business Administration and a Master of Health Care Administration from Texas Women’s University; and a graduate certificate in Legislative Affairs from Georgetown University.