Iran has accused the US of violating the agreement aimed at ending the war between the two sides, after the US military launched strikes around the strait of Hormuz and revoked a temporary sanctions waiver for Tehran to export oil.
The US military said that it hit more than 80 targets in the early hours of Wednesday in response to 
Iranian attacks on three commercial vessels
 that were ⁠transiting through the strait of Hormuz on Tuesday.
“Iran’s demonstrated aggression was unwarranted, dangerous, and a clear violation of ‌the ceasefire,” US central command said, referring to the three tankers, including a Qatari LNG vessel, that were struck within hours in the strait.
Iran responded by launching attacks on US military sites in Bahrain and Kuwait, with the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps claiming 85 facilities had been targeted. Air raid sirens were heard in both countries and the Kuwaiti army said air defences were confronting “hostile” missile and drone attacks, but there was no confirmation of any damage.
Wednesday’s attacks were the latest in a string of ceasefire violations between the two sides, despite a truce that came into effect in April, and the 
signing of a memorandum of understanding
 (MOU) last month that began 60 days of negotiations to resolve the issue of Iran’s nuclear program and bring a permanent end to hostilities.
US officials speaking to multiple media outlets said Wednesday’s attacks targeted Iranian weapon launch sites, air defences and coastal surveillance system. Iranian state media reported a series of explosions on the Iranian island of Qeshm in the strait of Hormuz, and in the city’s of Sirik and Bandar Abbas.
US media reported that Donald Trump signed off on the strikes while attending the Nato summit in Turkey. Speaking on Wednesday morning, Nato’s ⁠secretary general, Mark Rutte, backed the US attacks, saying: “When you ​have ‌a ‌ceasefire and Iran ‌is basically violating the ceasefire, I think it is ‌totally crucial that the ​U.S. forcefully react.”
Iran’s foreign ministry accused the US of repeated violations of the MOU and warned that it would take “decisive measures” in response. Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf, Tehran’s chief negotiator in the talks with the US, said violations of the MOU included interference in the strait of Hormuz, Israeli attacks in Lebanon and strikes on southern Iran.
Ghalibaf also cited the US treasury’s decision on Tuesday to ⁠revoke the ⁠temporary ​suspension of sanctions on Iranian oil ⁠sales.
The US lifted sanctions on Iranian oil exports last month after signing the MOU, but re-imposed them on Tuesday after the attack on ​vessels in the strait ​of ‌Hormuz.
The waiver on Iranian oil exports proved to be controversial among critics of the Trump administration’s Iran agreement, who said it amounted to the surrender of a key tool of economic leverage, before negotiations over the nuclear program had even begun.
The United Kingdom Maritime Trade Operations centre (UKMTO) said a Qatari tanker, Al Rekayyat, was among the vessels hit on Tuesday as it tried to travel south out of the strait toward the Gulf of Oman.
Qatar has been acting as a mediator in the talks between Washington and Tehran, but its foreign ministry spokesperson, Majed al-Ansari, called it a “serious and explicit violation” of international law and said Qatar would hold Iran fully responsible for the act of aggression.
All three tankers were hit close to 
Oman
, which has proposed a new shipping corridor close to its coastline, a suggestion which Iran opposes as it wants to charge ships to use the waterway.
Iran said on Tuesday that Washington’s efforts to open up new routes through the strait constituted a breach of the memorandum of understanding the two parties had signed. Tehran claims 
the memorandum is specifically worded
 to leave it, in consultation with Oman, to manage the reopening of the strait with the aim of commercial traffic returning to prewar levels within 30 days.
Experts have said that the vague wording of the MOU has left both sides interpreting the agreement in different ways, with the repeated misunderstandings a continuing threat the ceasefire.
Wednesday’s strikes from the US came 
during the days-long funeral for Iran’s Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei
, who was killed at the beginning of the war. Tuesday saw huge crowds mourning Khamenei in the holy city ⁠of Qom, with hundreds of thousands of people carrying flags and banners comparing Khamenei to revered Shi’ite martyrs. Some bore placards and banners reading “KILL TRUMP“.