Home
                    


 







                        Middle East
                    








Live


Middle East live: US strikes Iran as Gulf states targeted in flareup over Hormuz






Issued on: 
13/07/2026 - 00:52
Modified: 
13/07/2026 - 00:55
 

















                A projectile is fired during what the US Central Command (CENTCOM) said was a third round of strikes this week against Iran, July 11, 2026        © US Central Command, Reuters    
 









                                The US military on Sunday said it had launched a new wave of attacks against Iran, after renewed fighting over the Strait of Hormuz saw several of Washington's Gulf allies targeted by incoming fire. The flare-up is the latest to undermine an interim agreement between Washington and Tehran aimed at ending their war, which has caused global economic shockwaves since it began in late February. Follow our liveblog for the latest updates.             




 
 








13/07/2026 - 00:55
US strikes Iran as Gulf states targeted in flareup over Hormuz


The US military on Sunday said it had launched a new wave of attacks against Iran, after renewed fighting over the Strait of Hormuz saw several of Washington's Gulf allies targeted by incoming fire.
The latest salvo by US forces began at 2100 GMT on Sunday, Central Command (CENCTOM) said on X, after earlier announcing approximately 140 strikes the previous night.
The flare-up is the latest to undermine an interim agreement between Washington and Tehran aimed at ending their war, which has caused global economic shockwaves since it began in late February.
Oil prices, which have tumbled since the announcement of the agreement, rose over 3.5 percent when futures trading opened Monday in Tokyo, with the US benchmark WTI jumping above $74 a barrel.
Iran reported strikes Sunday evening on two of its southern islands while Kuwait, where Tehran has repeatedly targeted US installations, said border posts and an offshore oil platform had been attacked.
The renewed fighting followed an Iranian attack early Sunday on a commercial ship in the Strait of Hormuz, whose crew was forced to abandon it after it went up in flames.






13/07/2026 - 00:52






13/07/2026 - 00:51








 
More than 10 projectiles struck 
Iran
's Gulf island of Qeshm in the strategic 
Strait of Hormuz
 on Sunday, state 
media
 reported, as hostilities resumed between Tehran and Washington.
 
President 
Donald Trump
 said Sunday the United States hit Iran hard in response to its latest attacks on 
shipping
 in the Strait of Hormuz.
 
The 
US military
 insisted Sunday that ships are moving through the Strait of Hormuz despite Iran's claim to have closed it in the latest flare-up of the Mideast war.
 
 
(FRANCE 24 with Reuters, AP and AFP)


































As it happened





                                    Middle East
                            




















Keywords for this article