On Sunday, voters in the South American country of Colombia are facing a choice.
Four years ago, they elected the first left-wing president in the country’s modern history, 
Gustavo Petro
. Now, they must decide whether to continue with Petro’s leftist push — or restore the political right to power.
Recommended Stories 
list of 3 items
end of list
Fourteen candidates will be on the ballot for the first round of voting in Colombia’s presidential election.  The packed field includes contenders from the left, right and centre, who are slated to face off over 
issues like security
 and the cost of living.
But Petro will not be among them: Presidents in Colombia are limited to a single four-year term.
The right wing is expected to have the advantage, particularly if the race proceeds to a second round. Petro is struggling with low poll numbers, and voters have expressed frustration with 
crime and violence
, driven in part by the country’s six-decade-long internal conflict.
But leftist candidate Ivan Cepeda has surprised observers, consistently placing at the top of the polls ahead of the first round.
When is the election, who are the candidates, and which issues are top of mind for voters? We look at those questions and more in this brief explainer.
 
 
When is the election?
The first round of voting is set to take place on May 31, 2026.
Will there be a second round of voting?
A candidate would need to win more than 50 percent of the vote in the first round to avoid a run-off.
If no single candidate meets that threshold, a run-off will be held between the top two finishers on June 21.
Why is this election important?
In recent years, across Latin America, long-entrenched left-wing governments have met defeat at the ballot box.
Last year alone, right-wing candidates have been elected to replace left-wing presidents in Bolivia, Chile and Honduras.
But Colombia does not have a long history of left-wing presidents. Petro was the first. That makes this race one to watch, according to Gimena Sanchez, a Colombia expert at the Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA), a human rights nonprofit.
“This is the first election to be held after the first-ever leftist administration in Colombia’s 200-year history,” Sanchez explained.
Colombia now stands at a fork in the road. One of the dominant issues in the election is how to resolve the country’s internal conflict, which forced more than 235,619 individuals from their homes in 2025.
Another 87,069 people were caught up in mass displacement events due to the fighting, according to the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Petro has embraced negotiation as a tool to end the conflict, which has seen government forces, criminal networks, left-wing rebels and right-wing paramilitaries all battling one another.
But the political right has advocated a return to the more militarised approach backed by the United States, according to Sanchez.
“The leading candidates fall into two camps: continuity with the leftist government of Petro and an approach to security that focuses on negotiations with armed groups, and right-wing candidates who very much want to go back to a hardline security model that Colombia had in the past,” Sanchez said.
“You have polar opposite visions for the country.”
Who is the main candidate on the left?
Senator Ivan Cepeda has emerged as the primary candidate of the political left, running as the head of the governing coalition, known as Historic Pact.
Cepeda has largely pledged continuity with Petro’s platform, including social and economic policies meant to reduce inequality.
He has also embraced Petro’s “Total Peace” approach, which aims to resolve the country’s internal fighting by 
negotiating with armed groups
 and criminal networks, as opposed to solely relying on military force.
Confronting state-backed violence has become a hallmark of Cepeda’s life and career.
His father, who was also a senator, is believed to have been assassinated by a government-backed paramilitary. For years, Cepeda was also embroiled in a legal battle for accusing former President Alvaro Uribe of connections to right-wing paramilitaries.
Presidential candidate Ivan Cepeda speaks to supporters during his final campaign rally in Barranquilla, Colombia, on May 24 [Vanessa Romero/AFP]
Who are the main candidates on the right?
While Cepeda has become the standard-bearer for the left, the political right has had to contend with a more fractured field of candidates.
Running on the far right is Abelardo de la Espriella, a lawyer for the Defenders of the Homeland Party who has generated comparisons with Salvadoran President Salvador Bukele and Argentina’s Javier Milei.
Like those leaders, de la Espriella has offered a hardline vision for his country’s security. If elected, he says he would end negotiations with armed groups, bomb rebel camps, and resume the aerial fumigation of 
coca ⁠crops
, which produce the raw material for cocaine.
Senator Paloma Valencia, a candidate with the Democratic Centre Party, is running as a more moderate alternative to de la Espriella. She too has promised a stricter approach to crime. Her platform involves expanding the police and armed forces, while cutting taxes and promoting pro-business policies in the economic realm.
Their election-season competition has become a source of acrimony for Valencia and de la Espriella, who have accused each other of paving the way for a leftist election victory.
“There is a more familiar, establishment right, represented by Valencia, and a far right in the form of de la Espriella, who pitches himself as an outsider,” said Sanchez.
Valencia, for her part, has criticised de la Espriella as two-faced, defending criminals in his legal practice but advocating for tighter security on the campaign trail.
De la Espriella, meanwhile, has dismissed Valencia as a member of the country’s political establishment and chided her in a social media post, stating that the presidential election is “not for little games”.
Paloma Valencia of the Democratic Centre Party speaks to supporters during her final campaign rally in Bogota on May 24 [Raul Arboleda/AFP]
What are the polls saying?
Polls generally show Cepeda ahead of his rivals, with de la Espriella in second place and Valencia in third.
A May 24 poll from the National Consulting Centre (CNC) and the publication Cambio suggested that Cepeda had drawn 33.4 percent of voter support, the most of any candidate.
But de la Espriella was on the upswing with 30.9 percent. Valencia, meanwhile, trailed with 12.6 percent.
The same surveys, however, suggest that Cepeda would struggle to win a run-off against either of the two right-wing candidates, with de la Espriella eking out about three points in a head-to-head contest, and Valencia coming within a percentage point of victory.
Undecided voters could play a key role in deciding the outcome, though. An analysis cited by the Spanish paper El Pais estimates that undecided voters could account for as much as 28 percent of the electorate.
Presidential candidate Abelardo de la Espriella, of the Defensores de la Patria party, speaks behind bulletproof glass during his closing campaign rally in Medellin, Colombia, on May 24, 2026 [Jaime Saldarriaga/AFP]
Which issues are front and centre?
Concerns over crime, security and economic issues like unemployment and affordability have dominated the election.
In a poll from the firm Invamer, the highest proportion of voters — 37 percent — identified security as the top issue facing the country.
Basic needs and unemployment ranked second and third, with 17 percent and 16 percent, respectively. Eleven percent of voters, meanwhile, named corruption as a leading concern.
The threat of violence has lingered over the presidential campaign over the past year.
Two 
political staffers
 with de la Espriella’s campaign were killed by gunmen on motorbikes earlier this month. And in June 2025, presidential candidate 
Miguel Uribe Turbay
 was shot while leaving a campaign rally. The 39-year-old 
died two months later
 from his injuries.
Political violence is a serious concern in Colombia, and all of the frontrunners in the race travel with heavy security.