1 
 
NOTE FOR THE FILE 
Meeting between Mr. Tom Fletcher, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and 
Emergency Relief Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinators  
Virtual, 29 September 2025 
 
Participants:  
Mr. Tom Fletcher, USG for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator (USG/ERC) 
Ms. Joyce Msuya, ASG for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator (ASG/DERC) 
Humanitarian Coordinators:  
Mr. Indrika Ratwatte, Afghanistan;  Mr. Maurice Azonnankpo, Burkina Faso (OiC); Mr. Issa Sanogo, 
Cameroon; Mr. Mohamed Ag Ayoya, CAR;  Mr. François Batalingaya, Chad; Ms. Mireia Villar Forner, 
Colombia; Mr. Bruno Lemarquis, DRC; Ms. Nahla Valji, Eritrea; Mr. Imran Riza, Lebanon;  Ms. Catherine 
Sozi, Mozambique; Mr. Michael Dunford, Myanmar  (OiC); Ms. Mama Keita, Niger; Mr. Mohamed Fall, 
Nigeria; Mr. Mohamed Yahya, Pakistan; Mr. George Conway, Somalia; Ms. Anita Kiki Gbeho, South Sudan; 
Ms. Meritxell Relaño Arana, Syrian Arab Republic  (OiC); Mr. Matthias Schmale, Ukraine; Mr. Gianluca 
Rampolla del Tindaro, Venezuela; Mr. Edward Kallon, Zim babwe;  Ms. Suzanna Tkalec, OPT (DHC); Mr. 
Antoine Gerard, Sudan (DHC) 
Ms. Edem Wosornu, EDG Chair/Director, CRD, OCHA 
Ms. Lisa Doughten, Director, FOD, OCHA 
Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Director, HSD, OCHA  
Mr. Rafael Sacal, Chief of Staff, OUSG, OCHA 
Ms. Mervat Shelbaya, Chief, IASC Secretariat 
Ms. Alice Armani Sequi, PFMB, OCHA 
Ms. Gemma Connell, SBBP, OCHA 
Ms. Sofie Garde Thomle, Director, IASC Peer-2-Peer Support, OCHA 
Ms. Cindy Issac, Section Chief, HLSS, OCHA 
Mr. Valijon Ranoev, HLSS, OCHA (note-taker) 
 
Summary of discussions:  
 
1. The USG/ERC opened the meeting with an overview of the UN High-Level Week, summarizing key senior 
leadership engagements with a focus on Gaza, Sudan, Syria, and Ukraine. On UN80, he noted broad 
Member State support and referred HCs to the recently published UN80 report on Workstream 3. On the 
Humanitarian Reset, he highlighted strong backing from Member States, many of whom are urging the 
system to “go further and faster”. On the US funding, the USG/ERC noted good steps during the week, 
with conversations moving from what the US will not do to what they can potentially do. 
 
2. The USG/ERC recognized progress made since February  – protecting humanitarian space, simplifying 
coordination, leading transitions, and advancing localisation – and reiterated his message that the HCs 
have the license to go even further to deliver change that best fits their contexts.  
 
3. In this regard, the USG/ERC highlighted HC leadership on the following issues as critical: (a) prioritized 
appeals and plans that clearly define the scope of the humanitarian crisis, focus on the most severe needs 
and protection risks, reflect the priorities of affected communities , and bring L/NNGOs into the process; 
(b) context-specific coordination, streamlining or adapting structures, including clusters, to local realities, 
while safeguarding humanitarian principles  and ensuring that independent humanitarian action is not 
merged with development action; (c) shifting power and resources to local actors, including women-led 
organizations, by ensuring meaningful representation in HCTs, co-leadership of clusters, and humanitarian 
action being directly informed by crises-affected people's priorities; and (d) the strategic use of pooled 
funds to deliver on the above, including significantly increasing the share channelled to local and national 
actors, and communicating on resulting changes/impact to counter perceptions on the Reset not advancing 
fast enough.
2 
 
 
4. The USG/ERC shed light on ongoing efforts to empower HCs , including by providing political cover, 
strengthening HC–HCT two-way accountability, simplify ing clusters and support ing area-based 
coordination, and driving increased cash programming, including related support by the pooled funds. He 
urged HCs and HCTs to push for locally- led responses at the country level, backed by the IASC at the 
global level. The ERC also underlined  the Deputy SG  and his commitment to do more on developing 
shared performance evaluations as part of the UN80 Shared Platform Initiative.  
 
5. The USG/ERC  also encouraged HCs and HCTs to show concrete examples of Reset implementation 
through storytelling and communications to counter scepticism  and resistance inside and outside the 
system. He invited HCs to share context-specific progress, challenges, and support needs for implementing 
the Reset. This will also help to inform the IASC Principals discussions on 28 October as well as shape 
next steps under the Reset1. 
 
6. Mozambique: The HC reported on shifting coordination from Maputo to Pemba, and advancing locally-
led response, with 100 per cent of the Humanitarian Fund allocated to national NGOs. She noted challenges 
with government capacity to lead coordination. Cameroon : The HC underlined that an HCT -validated 
vision on the transition is guiding A rea Based Coordination (A BC) and resource mobilization, but 
government ownership and sector coordination as well as protection risks remain a challenge. Despite 
hyper-prioritization, funding remains significantly less than previous years. He requested USG/ERC and 
IASC support on localization, noting that humanitarian principles may not always be fully upheld —a 
concern echoed by other participants. 
 
7. DRC: The HC reported Reset implementation underway and requested OCHA support to engage Cluster 
Lead Agencies to address reduced coordination capacity. He emphasized the humanitarian community’s 
authority and role in prevention and risk mitigation, especially given the current financial climate. South 
Sudan: The HC noted the response plan target and funding requirements had been reduced, while 50 per 
cent of pooled fund allocations are going to local NGOs. Progress was reported on cluster mergers, ABC, 
and nexus coordination. She called for advocacy with donors on shifting the narrative that providing 
development funding in fragile contexts inadvertently reinforces behaviours.  
  
8. Colombia: The HC outlined challenges on the volatile political and security context. She noted progress 
on a detailed Reset implementation plan and highlighted worrying funding trends and the need to get ahead 
donor funding allocations. Pooled funding and clusters are areas where she suggested further conversation, 
noting the language on empowering HCs is often contradicted by the need to repeatedly “check-in” at the 
HQ level before moving ahead. She also voiced concerns that nationalization of clusters may lead to needs 
not being represented within the GHO.   
 
9. Myanmar: The HC OiC stressed the need for streamlined OCHA–DCO coordination, and greater 
engagement with Gulf States for resource mobilization. Pakistan: The HC highlighted the value of CERF 
and pooled funds in natural disaster response, with 100 per cent of allocations directed to local actors. He 
requested clarity on support and capacity from 2026 onward given heightened monsoon risks and stressed 
the importance of OCHA’s regional support from Bangkok.  
 
10. Afghanistan: The HC reported on cluster transition efforts to a common platform and ABC progress. He 
highlighted challenges with regards to boundary setting as part of response planning and defining needs.  
He requested support to ensure clarity  on common platforms, noting that a humanitarian donor recently 
raised concerns about diluting humanitarian principles while working in a more joined manner, rather than 
viewing this as a continuum of resilience/stability effort . Lebanon: The HC stressed the need to shift 
toward development but noted donor funding gaps in supporting localization and NGO capacity-building. 
 
1There was an overall convergence of views on many of the issues. Therefore, this note does not capture every example 
and challenges raised by HCs.
3 
 
He underlined the need for adequate staffing to manage pooled funds. He noted that the latest allocation is 
targeting 70 per cent to national NGOs. 
 
11. Chad: The HC requested support in establishing ABC across different zones, clarity on Global Cluster 
Lead support, and highlighted the need for stronger humanitarian– development links. He also called for 
high level coordination between OCHA and UNHCR that involve HCs on the mixed settings model. CAR: 
The HC reported good progress on decentralized  coordination under the leadership of the government , 
with support in terms of capacity and mobility. A Reset Committee has been set up which include s 
government and local communities. He highlighted an increase in local NGO allocations (6 per cent in 
2022 to 36 per cent in 2025).  
 
12. Nigeria: The HC requested clearer understanding of Reset expectations  among partners at the country 
level. He also not ed resistance from the humanitarian community to engage with development partners. 
On Anticipatory Action (AA), he shared a recent initiative that reached 350,000 people with government 
engagement as a good example of collaboration and bottom -up approach to reducing needs . Niger: The 
HC echoed AA, prevention, and nexus approaches as efficient tools to reduce needs, but flagged rising 
security risks and funding challenges.  
 
13. Burkina Faso: The HC OiC reported on coordination simplification discussions and sought guidance on 
government engagement given the challenges in the country. He noted progress on localization (50 per 
cent of HRP partners are national, 30  per cent of funding to local NGOs) but flagged challenges with 
access to funds linked to compliance and risk management. Syria: The HC OiC highlighted national NGO 
interest in leadership roles despite resistance from ministers. She confirmed the transition to “One Syria” 
architecture is complete, with other Reset elements pending new leadership. Venezuela: The HC stressed 
urgent humanitarian diplomacy to address the deepening crisis and shrinking civic space, calling for 
mobilization across humanitarian, human rights, and political actors to support de-escalation.  
 
14. The ASG/DERC highlighted ongoing OCHA–DCO work to strengthen coordination. She also stressed 
the importance of direct feedback from country operations and encouraged HCs to maintain this feedback 
channel to inform global discussions.  
 
15. The USG/ERC reaffirmed his commitment to provide additional support, including issuing follow up 
guidance to strengthen HC roles within HCTs . On expectations by partners at the country level, the  
USG/ERC noted that he is having conversations with the IASC Principals on assessing country 
representatives on how well they are able to c oordinate and work with HCs and together as an  HCT, 
including to drive Reset related change. On humanitarian diplomacy, USG/ERC was looking to put more 
energy and build on the work already underway as part of the Humanitarian Cluster under the UN80. He 
also committed to engaging bilaterally with HCs on humanitarian diplomacy. He acknowledged the need 
to understand and adapt to the risks as they emerge to push forward with localisation. On the future of data, 
the USG/ERC noted that this would be reviewed at the IASC and OCHA levels.  
 
16. On pooled funds, FOD Director noted that more than 60 per cent of pooled funds were currently allocated 
to local and national partners. She also noted that while the global guidelines were currently being revised, 
there is an agreement with donors to continue to innovate. The CRD Director stressed her full support to 
HCs in addressing the challenges raised in the call and beyond. She also acknowledged the challenges and 
risks and reiterated the need to strike the right balance between handing over to government and preserving 
humanitarian principles. The HS D Director acknowledged the reduced coordination capacity across 
contexts and offered support to address this, while noting expected reduction in funding going forward.
4 
 
Action points: 
Action point     Capture existing good practice on Reset implementation  
Assigned to:     IASC Secretariat, in consultation with HCs 
Responsible Office:    IASC Secretariat 
Deadline:     Immediate  
 
 
Action point  Report back on the progress on the Shared Platform as part of UN80,   
Assigned to:     HLSS 
Responsible Office:    HLSS 
Deadline:     20 December 2025 
 
Action point  Share feedback to relevant HCs in transition countries following the 
meeting between OCHA and DSG.  
Assigned to:     SPPB 
Responsible Office:    SPPB 
Deadline:     By 15 December 2025
 
Action point  Capture where development support is pulling out. Take up the issue 
with the Joint Steering Committee.  
Assigned to:     SPPB 
Responsible Office:    SPPB 
Deadline:     By 31 October 2025
 
 
Action point  Share the 10 immediate actions for Country/Regional Pooled Funds to 
advance the Reset and offer a session to discuss challenges and 
opportunities to move forward. 
Assigned to:  PFB 
Responsible Office:    PFB 
Deadline:     Immediate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Valijon Ranoev/HLSS/OUSG] 
[2 October 2025]