No. 115 – May 2026                       www.cropmonitor.org 
The Crop Monitor is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global initiative.  
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
Contents:  
 
Conditions at a Glance…………………………………….……………..…......2  
Global Climate Outlook; Climate Influences…….…………..…........3  
East Africa; Regional Outlook ……………………………………………… ...4 
West Afric a……………………………. .……….. …………………..….………... .....8 
Middle East & North Africa ……………………………. ....................... .....9 
Southern Africa ……………………………. ...………………. …………..……… .10 
Central & South Asi a……………………………. ..……………... ...........… ...12 
Southeast Asia ……………………………..……………………………………………1 3 
Central America & Caribbean; Regional Outlook……. …………. …. 16 
Appendix – Terminology & Definitions……………….…….….. .......18 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
   
   
 
 
  
 
Overview: 
In East Africa, conditions are mostly favourable for Belg season cereals in 
Ethiopia and main season cereals across the subregion, except in Rwanda, 
Burundi, Uganda, and Somalia due to recent rainfall delays and deficits.  
In West Africa, agro-climatic conditions remain favourable for the 2026 
to 2027 main season cereals, though conflict remains a concern in affected 
areas.  
In the Middle East & North Africa , winter wheat continues to develop 
under mostly favourable conditions following improved rains, except in 
parts of Libya, Iraq, and Iran. 
In Southern Africa, harvesting of main season cereals continues under 
mixed conditions, with ongoing concern regarding tropical cyclone and 
flooding impacts, dry conditions, and ongoing conflict in affected areas. 
In Central & South Asia, conditions remain favourable for winter wheat 
crop development and the start of spring wheat planting. 
In Southeast Asia, conditions are generally favourable for wet-season rice 
and maize in the south and dry-season rice and maize in the north, though 
conflict in Cambodia is expected to reduce dry-season rice production.  
In Central America & the Caribbean, there is concern for the start of the 
Primera season in Guatemala due to rainfall deficits  and high 
temperatures.
2 No. 115 – May 2026  Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
GEOGLAM Crop Monitor for Early Warning   
Crop Conditions at a Glance  
based on best available information as of April 28 th
EAST AFRICA: Belg season cereals are developing favourably 
across Ethiopia, and conditions are mostly favourable for 
planting and development of main season cereals across the 
subregion, except in Rwanda, Burundi, parts of Uganda , and 
Somalia where recent rainfall delays and deficits may negatively 
impact crops. Forecasts indicate an elevated chance of below-
normal rainfall for the June to September period (See Regional 
Outlook Pg. 6).   
WEST AFRICA:  Planting of main season maize and rice is 
underway along the Gulf of Guinea while harvesting of second 
season rice is nearing completion in Mali and Mauritania, and 
agro-climatic conditions remain favourable despite slight 
rainfall deficits in some areas. 
MIDDLE EAST & NORTH AFRICA: Winter wheat continues 
to develop under mostly favourable conditions as early season 
deficits were followed by generally good rains in most areas. 
However, concern remains in parts of Libya, Iraq, and Iran, and 
escalating regional violence continues to dis rupt production 
across parts of the Middle East.  
SOUTHERN AFRICA:  Harvesting of main season cereals 
continues under mixed conditions, with ongoing dry concerns 
in parts of Angola, eastern Zimbabwe, southern Mozambique, 
eastern South Africa, and southern Madagascar. Planting of 
winter wheat is just beginning under favourable conditions. 
CENTRAL & SOUTH ASIA: Winter wheat crops continue to 
develop under favourable conditions, and planting of spring 
wheat is underway with a favourable start to the season. In 
Afghanistan, conditions are favourable despite below-average 
October 2025 through April 2026 rains. 
SOUTHEAST ASIA: In the south, harvesting of wet- season 
rice and maize is underway , while planting of dry -season rice 
continues. In the north, harvesting of dry-season rice and maize 
is underway, and sowing of wet -season rice has started in 
southern Viet Nam. Overall conditions are favourable, though 
ongoing conflict in Cambodia is expected to reduce dry-season 
rice production.  
CENTRAL AMERICA & CARIBBEAN:  Land preparation for 
the Primera season is underway, and planting is just beginning 
in Guatemala with concern regarding below-normal rains and 
high temperatures that are forecast to continue (See Seasonal 
Forecast Alert Pg. 17 ). In Cuba, severe fuel shortages since 
January are negatively impacting ongoing agricultural 
activities.
 
Crop condition map synthesizing information for all Crop Monitor for Early Warning crops as of April 28th. Crop conditions over the main growing areas 
are based on a combination of i nputs including remotely sensed data, ground observations, field reports, national, and regional experts. Regions that 
are in other than favourable conditions are labeled on the map with a symbol representing the crop(s) affected.
3 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Glo bal Clima te Outlook: Two - week forecast of areas of above or below - average 
precipitation  
The two-week forecast (Figure 1) shows a chance of above- average precipitation over central Mexico, northern and northeast 
Brazil, southern Norway, southwestern Sweden, Estonia, eastern Latvia, northeastern Lithuania, central Russia, southern South  
Sudan, northern and western Uganda, eastern and central Democratic Republic of the Congo, northern Angola, northcentral 
South Africa, western Kazakhstan, northwestern Turkmenistan, western Uzbekistan, southern China, Indonesia, and eastern 
Australia. 
There is also a risk of below -average precipitation over central and western Canada, western Cuba, southern Guatemala, 
Honduras, eastern El Salvador, western Nicaragua, southern Costa Rica, northern Colombia, Venezuela, Guyana, southeastern 
Bolivia, Paraguay, southern Brazil, Uruguay, northern and central Argentina, southern Chile, Portugal, Spain, southern Italy, 
southern Albania, southern Greece, northern Russian Federation, western Türkiye, Syria, northern Morocco, northern Algeria, 
southern Senegal, The Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, southern Mali, western and southern Burkina Faso, 
northern Nigeria, southeastern Chad, western Ethiopia, northeastern Tanzania, northern Madagascar, western South Africa, 
northern and eastern Kazakhsta n, central Uzbekistan, southern Mongolia, northern and southwestern China, central India, 
Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Viet Nam, Cambodia, southern Japan, and the central and southern Philippines. 
 
 
 
Climate Influences: El  Niño  forecast to develop during May to July 2026  
Neutral ENSO conditions are present. El Niño conditions are confidently forecast from mid-2026 to early 2027. El Niño conditions 
may develop soon—during May to July 2026 (61 percent chance)—and could become a moderate or strong event. According to 
the April 2026 NOAA CPC ENSO outlook, there is an 87 to 92 percent chance of El Niño conditions from July 2026 to January 
2027. 
El Niño events tend to enhance rainfall in Central Asia, southern North America, south-eastern South America, southern Europe, 
eastern and southern East Africa, and southern and eastern China. Drier-than-average conditions tend to occur in Central America, 
the Caribbean, northern South America, parts of western and northern East Africa, the Sahel region, Southern Africa, India, 
Northern China, the Maritime Continent, and Australia. 
Global temperatures for March 2026 were the fourth warmest on record, according to the Copernicus Climate Change Service 
Climate Bulletin. The likelihood of extreme conditions during the coming year will increase as El Niño warms global temperatures. 
 
 
During April 2026, abnormally hot conditions 
occurred in Southeast Asia— especially in Thailand, 
Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam —as well as in West 
Africa in Benin, Burkina Faso, and Nigeria, and in El 
Salvador and Mexico. During May 2026, above -
average temperatures are forecast in West Africa, 
East Africa, central Southern Africa and Madagascar, 
central and northern Asia, Southeast Asia, eastern 
Australia, western Canada, the western United 
States, northwestern Mexico, Central America, the 
Caribbean, and northern and central South America. 
 
Figure 1. Average temperature anomaly forecast for the next 30 days starting on 30 April 2026, from five Subseasonal Consortium (SubC) models. 
SubC data accessed from the IRI Data Library. Map source: UCSB Climate Hazards Center . 
 
Figure 1: IRI SubX Precipitation Biweekly Probability 
Forecast for 9 –  22 May, issued on 1 May 2026. The 
forecast is based on statistically calibrated tercile 
category forecasts from three SubX models. Source: IRI 
Subseasonal Forecasts Maproom
4 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
East Africa  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Across northern East Africa, winter wheat harvesting finalized in Sudan under poor conditions due to ongoing conflict. Belg season 
maize crops are in the vegetative to reproductive stage in Ethiopia, while planting of main season cereals is underway in South Sudan 
and Yemen, and overall conditions are favourable with normal crop development.  
Across southern East Africa, planting and development of main season cereals is underway across Uganda, Kenya (long rains), 
Somalia (Gu season), Rwanda, Burundi, and the United Republic of Tanzania . Growing conditions are mostly favourable, with 
recent rainfall improvement across unimodal central and southern areas in the United Republic of Tanzania. Conversely, recent drier 
than normal conditions are causing concern in Rwanda, Burundi, and central and western bimodal areas of Uganda. While current 
impacts on crop biomass are mixed in Rwanda and Burundi, production shortfalls are likely if below-average rainfall continues. In 
Somalia, antecedent dry and hot conditions were followed by a delayed onset of the April to June Gu  rains (See Regional Outlook 
Pg. 6).  
The season has been categorized by an extremely early 
rainfall onset by up to a month in some areas, including in 
Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi, parts of the United Republic of 
Tanzania, and some southern Belg  cropping areas in 
Ethiopia. Extreme rains in March resulted in flooding and 
landslides across Kenya, parts of Uganda, southern United 
Republic of Tanzania, and Ethiopia. Conversely, a dry spell 
in April then impacted many of these same areas, though the 
earlier rains mitigated much of the negative impacts. 
Throughout west and northern areas of East Africa, below -
normal rainfall is forecast during the June to September 
period, consistent with patterns in similar El Niño years (See 
Climate Influences Pg. 3 and Regional Outlook Pg. 6).  
 
 
 
For detailed description of the pie chart please see description box on Pg. 18. 
Crop condition map synthesizing Maize 1 crop conditions as of April 28th. Crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on a combination of 
inputs including remotely sensed data, ground observations, field reports, national, and regional experts. Conditions that are other than favourable 
are labeled on the map with their driver.
5 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
 
Northern East Africa & Yemen  
In Sudan, harvesting of winter wheat finalized in 
April with below-average yields expected due to 
ongoing conflict. In South Sudan, planting of 
first season cereals is just beginning under 
favourable conditions. In Ethiopia, Belg season 
maize crops are in the vegetative to reproductive 
stage for harvest from June, and overall growing 
conditions remain favourable across the country 
with above-average cumulative rains across the 
Belg cropping areas (See Regional Outlook Pg. 
6). In Yemen, sorghum planting continues under 
favourable agro -climatic conditions. The rainy 
season began earlier than usual, with low -
intensity rainfall recorded f rom March 20, 
followed by intensification from March 27 that 
triggered severe flooding  and affected more 
than ten governorates.  While the rains were 
generally beneficial for cropping activities , 
protracted conflict and related challenges 
continue to limit production potential.  
 
Southern East Africa 
In Somalia, planting of Gu season cereals is just 
beginning with concern due to delayed rainfall 
onset, as well as antecedent dry conditions 
during October to December 2025 and a hotter 
than normal January to February 2026 period. 
Light to moderate rainfall occurred during mid-
March, signalling the approach of the April to 
June Gu rains, and some farmers began dry 
planting cereals in late March.  However, dry 
conditions persisted across most areas, and 
seasonal rainfall as of late April has been less 
than 30 to 45 percent of average across most 
areas, except localized areas in the southwest 
and northwest.  Mixed rainfall conditions are 
forecast through mid -May, which may bring 
average to localized above -average rainfall. 
However, this will only partly improve seasonal 
rainfall totals, and poor distribution will remain 
a concern (See Regional Outlook Pg. 6). During 
past years with similar El Niño conditions , 
sorghum yields were normal to below normal 
in the major producing sorghum regions. In 
Kenya, second season rice crops are in the vegetative to reproductive stage under favourable conditions in rice-growing areas of the 
centre and west. Additionally, planting of long rains maize and sorghum crops continues throughout the country under favourable 
conditions despite mixed rainfall outcomes over the last month. The March to May rains began early with above-average amounts, 
and average to above-average precipitation is expected to continue through May. However, the expected shift to El Niño conditions 
in the coming months increases the probability of below -average long rains between June and September in unimodal and major 
producing regions in the western half of the country (See Climate Influences Pg. 3 and Regional Outlook Pg. 6). In Uganda, planting 
and development of main season cereals is underway across the country, and there is concern in some bimodal areas, including in 
the centre and west, where recent dry conditions are hindering crop establishment. However, forecast average March to  May 
cumulative rains in bimodal areas are expected to benefit production, particularly among smallholder farmers. In Rwanda and 
Burundi, Season B maize crops are in the vegetative to reproductive stage, and conditions have been downgraded to watch due to 
recent drier than normal outcomes over the last month. However, impacts on crop biomass are currently mixed. Additionally, planting 
of Season B rice continues in Burundi under favourable conditions. In the United Republic of Tanzania, Masika (bimodal regions) 
and Msimu (unimodal regions) crops are in the vegetative to reproductive stage across the country, and overall conditions are 
Crop condition map synthesizing Sorghum 1 conditions as of April 28th. Crop conditions over the 
main growing areas are based on a combination of inputs including remotely sensed data, 
ground observations, field reports, national, and regional experts. Conditions that are other 
than favourable are labeled on the map with their driver.  
Crop condition map synthesizing Maize 2 conditions as of  April 28th. Crop conditions over the 
main growing areas are based on a combination of inputs including remotely sensed data, 
ground observations, field reports, national, and regional experts. Conditions that are other 
than favourable are labeled on the map with their driver.
6 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
favourable. In central and southern unimodal rainfall areas, recent rains mitigated prior concerns regarding erratic rainfall outcomes 
between November 2025 and January 2026. However, some flooding was reported in the south.  
 
 
 
Regional Outlook: Poor rainfall distribution during late March to mid - April 2026, 
drought continues in Somalia, and a forecast El Niño event brings risks to the 
region  
Several weeks of below-average rains during late March to mid-April 2026 raise concerns about potential negative crop impacts 
during early crop development stages. During March 26th to April 25th, 2026, these forecast poor rainfall conditions (see the April 
2026 East Africa Regional Alert) resulted in moderate-to-severe rainfall deficits in Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania, portions of 
central and south eastern Ethiopia, and in most areas of Kenya and Somalia. Preliminary estimates show less than 30 to 60 percent 
of average rainfall between late March and mid-April 2026 (Figure 1 top-left). Rainfall was above average elsewhere– in central-
southern and northern South Sudan, southern Sudan, northern, central-western and central-eastern Ethiopia, northeastern Kenya, 
and in localized areas of southeastern Ethiopia and southwestern Somalia. Rainfall totals for March 1st to May 10th will likely be 
average to above average across most areas, due in large part to abnormally wet conditions during March. February was also 
wetter than average. Rainfall deficits for March 1st to May 10th will likely persist in Burundi, southwestern and central Uga nda, 
southeastern Ethiopia and south-central and eastern Somalia (Figure 1 top-middle).  
In Somalia, following a failed October to December 2025 Deyr season and a hot and dry January to March 2026, pasture resources 
deteriorated, many water resources dried up, and agricultural production was severely hampered. As of April 25th, NDVI shows 
that vegetation conditions remain below average and many water points in central-southern Somalia are near dry. A late rainfall 
onset in central Somalia and poor rainfall amounts and distribution in southern and central Somalia are likely to hamper recovery 
of agricultural, pasture and water resources. Severe drought continues to deepen humanitarian needs with at least 2 million Somalis 
estimated to be facing acute (IPC 4) levels of hunger (OCHA, April 6th 2026).  
In Somalia, seasonal rains have been less than 30 to 45 percent of average across most areas, except localized areas in the 
southwest and northwest where rains were above average. Forecast mixed rainfall conditions, which may bring average to localized 
above-average rainfall during April 30th to May 14th (Figure 1 top -right), will only partly improve seasonal totals and poor 
distribution will remain a concern. Opportunities for more substantial improvement to seasonal rains typically decline after mid-
May, for example, in Hiraan and Bay regions which typically receive peak rainfall during late April- early May. Forecast warmer-
than-normal May 2026 temperatures may accelerate the drying of soils after rain events. 
In other areas with recent rainfall deficits (Figure 1 top-left), above-average rainfall during late April and forecast above-average 
amounts during early May are expected to improve conditions. However, the variable timing of rains, characterized by a very wet 
and early start to the season, and much drier than average conditions during late March to mid-late April, could have negatively 
impacted some crops. Despite the early April rainfall deficits, current conditions across Kenya are favourable due to enh anced 
rainfall in late April and earlier above average soil moisture that helped sustain the crops through the dryspell.  
Above-average rains are forecast in western and northern Kenya, southern, central, and eastern Ethiopia, Rwanda, Burundi, 
northwestern Tanzania, Uganda and parts of central and northern Somalia during April 30th to May 14th (Figure 1 top -right). 
Associated with forecast wetter-than-average conditions are elevated risks of flooding. Recently, prolonged heavy rains produced 
floods and landslides in Mbeya, southwestern Tanzania where at least 20 people lost their lives and about 600 were displaced 
(Reliefweb). In Kenya, heavy rains in late April destroyed property and displaced families in Nairobi , Kwale and Mombasa. In 
response to rising river levels across Kenya and forecasted continued enhanced rainfall across the central Highlands, the Ken ya 
Meteorological Services Authority (KMSA) has issued a flood alert for Garissa and Tana River counties within the first week of May. 
Due to potential negative impacts of El Niño on rainfall during the June to September 2026 season, the transition of seasonal rains 
into northern East Africa will need to be monitored. Rainfall conditions throughout May 2026 are uncertain. There is low agreement 
among subseasonal SubC multi-model ensemble and ECMWF forecasts from April 30th. Neither agrees with ICPAC’s earlier and 
largely above-normal May 2026 rainfall forecast. Above-average temperatures are forecast across much of East Africa during May 
2026.  
There will be elevated chances of below-normal June–September 2026 rains in western and northern areas, according to seasonal 
climate model forecasts including the WMO (Figure 1 bottom -left), C3S, and CHC MME  forecasts from April. The outlook is 
consistent with the drying effects of many recent El Niño years (Figure 1 bottom -right). Current ENSO neutral conditions are 
forecast to transition to El Niño during May to July (61 percent chance). El Niño conditions are conducive for above-normal rainfall 
during the short rains/Deyr 2026 season. NMME models indicate above-normal rainfall in eastern Ethiopia and Somalia beginning 
in September 2026 and across East Africa during September to November 2026. 
Continued Pg. 7
7 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
 
 
 
 
Regi onal Outlook  (continued) : Poor rainfall distribution during late March to mid -
April 2026, drought continues in Somalia, and a forecast El Niño event brings 
risks to the region  
 
Figure 1. The Top-left and Top-middle panels are CHC Early Estimates , which compare the March 26th to April 25th, 2026 ( Top-left) and  March 
1st to May 10th ( Top-middle) precipitation totals to the 1996 –2025 CHIRPS averages for the same accumulation period. These panels use CHIRPS3 
Preliminary for April 1 –25, 2026. A bias -adjusted NCEP GEFS forecast (CHIRPS3 -GEFS) is used for the 15 -day forecast from April 26th. Top -right: 
Forecast next 15-day precipitation anomaly for April 30th to May 14th, from the CHIRPS3 -GEFS forecast. Bottom -left: WMO multi-model ensemble 
probability forecast of June to September (JJAS) 2026 precipitation terciles, based on April initial conditions. Bottom -right: The frequency of below -
normal JJAS rainfall during years with concurrent El Niño conditions (1982, 1987, 1991, 1994, 1997, 2002, 2004, 2015, 2023), relative to 1991– 2020 
CHIRPS v3 terciles. In areas with orange to dark red colors, below -normal rains occurred in four to nine years (40 to 100%). Gray areas are typically 
dry during JJAS (mean rainfall < 50 mm). From UCSB CHC . 
Source: UCSB Climate Hazards Center
8 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
West Africa
In southern West Africa, planting of main season maize and rice is underway along the Gulf of Guinea, including in Liberia , Côte 
d’Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Benin, Nigeria, Cameroon, and the Central African Republic. Along the Sahel, harvesting of second season 
rice is nearing completion in Mali and Mauritania. Agro-climatic conditions remain favourable throughout the subregion. However, 
agricultural activities in central Mali , southwestern Cameroon , and the Central African Republic  continue to be impacted by 
persistent conflict. According to the CHIRPS rainfall totals from March 1 to April 15, the southern part of the subregion from Liberia 
to the Central African Republic received above-average rainfall, ranging from 75 mm to more than 200 mm, with localized areas 
receiving more than 300 mm in southern Liberia, southern Côte d’Ivoire, southwestern Ghana , southeastern Nigeria , and 
southwestern Cameroon. However, there is a slight-to-moderate deficit in central and western Liberia, southern Nigeria, southern 
Cameroon, and southwestern Central African Republic.  
In Togo, forecasts for the 2026/27 growing season indicate generally beneficial rains in southern areas, with some potential dry spells. 
Additionally, the government has strengthened production support in the form of input provision, credit access, advisory support, 
and the expansion of planned agricultural development zones. In Cameroon, a timely arrival of rains in March likely supported 
planting activities in March and April, and seasonal forecasts indicate average rains through May that are expected to support crop 
establishment and development. Additionally, a newly established gover nment agricultural support program provides subsidi zed 
inputs, including fertilizers, herbicides, and improved seeds, to smallholder and subsistence farmers. Ongoing conflict in the northwest 
and southwest regions is expected to continue undermining productive capacity, and elevated input prices are likely to constrain 
agricultural activities.  
Additionally, according to the Regional System for the Prevention and Management of Food Crises (PREGEC) key message updated 
in March 2026, the final results of the 2025 /26 agricultural season show an estimated cereal production of 80.4 million ton nes, 
representing a 4 percent increase compared to the previous season and a 7 percent increase compared to the five- year average. 
Average per capita cereal production remained stable, with a slight 1 percent increase compared to last year and equivalent to the 
past five-year average.  
Crop condition map synthesizing  crop conditions as of April 28th. Crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on a combination of inputs 
including remotely sensed data, ground observations, field reports, national, and regional experts. Crops that are in other than favourable conditions 
are labeled on the map with their driver.
9 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
Middle East & North  Afric a
Across the Middle East and North Africa, winter wheat continues to develop across Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Lebanon, 
Syria, Iraq, and Iran , and harvesting is just beginning in some areas. Growing conditions are mostly favourable with recent 
improvements in northern Morocco, Algeria, and northwestern Syria. However, early-season dry conditions continue to negatively 
affect crop performance in northwestern Libya and parts of central Iran. In southern Iraq, crop biomass remains below average due 
to a government decision to limit the area of cultivation using surface water. Furthermore, escalating regional conflict and related 
supply chain disruptions continue to impact parts of the Middle East. Flooding at the end of March also impacted parts of Syria, Iraq, 
and Iran, though the overall impact on crops is expected to be minimal.  
In Morocco, a drier than normal start to the season from October to mid-November 2025 was followed by a shift to improved rains 
at the end of November and in December 2025 and January 2026 across the country and in February 2026 in the north. Total rainfall 
since October 2025 is the highest of the last 25 years in the centre and northwest of the country (from Tadla Azizal and Chaouia to 
Tanger-Tétouan). Crop biomass is now above average in all regions, including in the east (Tadla Azilal, Maknes, and Oriental) where 
cereal growth was initially delayed. However, prolonged flooding in February damaged crops in localized areas of Gharb and Tanger 
Tetouan. Harvesting is expected to begin in May in the west, which was less affected by delayed growth, and overall cereal prospects 
are favourable. In Algeria, northwestern areas experienced low rainfall in October and November 2025 that resulted in delayed winter 
cereal growth. However, improved moisture conditions from December 2025 benefitted winter cereals. Crop biomass is now average 
to above average in Tiaret, an important cereal -producing region where initial crop growth was delayed, as well as in Saida and 
Tissemlit. In the northeast, beneficial rains since the start of the season have resulted in well above-average cereal biomass (from 
Medea to the Tunisian border). In Tunisia , conditions remain favourable for winter cereals with above-average crop biomass in all 
producing governorates, including in the east (Zaghouan, Ben Arous, and Nabeul) where crop biomass was initially well below average. 
The season began with rainfall deficits during October and November 2025 that delayed the start of cereal growth, particularly in the 
east. However, rainfall improvements since December 2025 through April 2026 have  supported the normal development of winter 
cereals. Harvesting is expected to start at the end of May for barley and in June for wheat. In Libya, barley and wheat harvesting is 
just beginning under mixed conditions. There is concern in the northwest (from Az Zawia to Misurata), likely due to a reduction of the 
sown area, while conditions around Banghazi remain favourable, except in Darna. In Egypt, winter wheat crops are in the vegetative 
to reproductive stage for harvest from May, while sowing of summer -planted rice is just beginning, and overall conditions remain 
favourable.  
In Syria, a dry start to the season was followed by rainfall improvements from December 2025, and cumulative rains since October 
are now above average in all governorates, including in the main producing Hassakeh governorate. However, heavy rains from mid-
Crop condition map synthesizing  Winter Wheat conditions as of April 28th. Crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on a combination of 
inputs including remotely sensed data, ground observations, field reports, national, and regional experts. Crops that are in other than favourable 
conditions are labeled on the map with their driver.
10 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
March and early April resulted in widespread flooding across northern areas (Aleppo, Idleb, Ar-Raqqa, Al-Hasakeh, and Deir-ez-Zor) 
and damaged 600 hectares of wheat in southern Aleppo and Idleb. Overall biomass is above  average, including in the northwest 
(Aleppo, Idleb, Hama, and Homs), where initial crop growth was strongly delayed. Overall wheat production is forecast at 2.5 million 
tons, supported by improved agricultural indicators and upgraded grain storage infrastructure. In Iraq, barley harvesting is underway 
while wheat harvesting will commence in May, and overall prospects are favourable. A drier than normal start to the season in October 
and November 2025 was followed by rainfall and moisture improvement since December 2025 through April 2026 across the country. 
Crop biomass is above  average in the main producing northern areas, while biomass is well below average in the south (Bab il, 
Qadissiya, Wassit, Thi-Qar, and Missan) due to the government’s decision to reduce the area irrigated with surface water by 50 percent. 
Only Najaf shows above-average crop biomass due to modern irrigation development. Additionally, the government approved rice 
cultivation this year for some provinces, including Najaf, Diwaniyah, Muthanna, and Kifl, and planting is expected to begin soon. In 
Iran, a drier than average start to the season in October and November 2025 was followed by abundant rains and moi sture 
improvement from December 2025 to early February 2026, and cumulative rainfall since October is near to above average. The good 
rains combined with above-average temperatures since February have benefitted cereal growth and replenished reservoirs, wh ich 
were at very low levels in November 2025. In the northwest (from the Iraqi border to Tehran and from Zanjan to Lorestan) , dry 
conditions returned from mid-February to early March, when rainfall was 50 percent below normal, but this was followed by a shift 
back to good rains from mid to late -March. Overall biomass is mixed, with average to above -average biomass in the main wheat-
producing northern provinces (West and East Azerbayejan and Ardebil in the northwest, Golestan and Khorasan in the northeast) and 
in the main wheat-producing central-southern provinces (Khuzestan and Fars). Conversely, biomass is below average in the centre 
(Hamedan, Markazi, Semnan, Esfahan, and Kordestan), likely due to dry conditions at the start of the season, which possibly reduced 
sowings. Furthermore, since February 28, 2026, the country has experienced a sharp and sustained escalation in hostilities, and the 
security situation remains highly volatile. 
 
Southern Africa
Across Southern Africa, harvesting of main season cereals is underway in all countries, including Angola , Namibia, Botswana, 
Zimbabwe, Zambia, Malawi, Mozambique, Madagascar, South Africa, Lesotho, and eSwatini, and will continue through May and 
into early June in some areas. Yield prospects remain mixed, with ongoing concern in parts of central and eastern Madagascar  
regarding the impacts of tropical cyclones in January and February. In Mozambique, erratic rains, including periods of heavy rains 
and flooding as well as a severe dry spell, could result in production declines in parts of the south and centre.  In parts of west and 
central Angola, eastern Zimbabwe, and southern Madagascar, erratic rains resulted in rainfall deficits that could impact cropping 
Crop condition map synthesizing  maize conditions as of April 28th. Crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on a combination  of inputs 
including remotely sensed data, ground observations, field reports, national, and regional experts. Crops that are in other than favourable conditions 
are labeled on the map with their driver.
11 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
outcomes. In eastern South Africa, dry conditions in February had a negative impact on yellow maize production, though overall 
maize production at the national level is expected to be above average. Furthermore, concern remains in the conflict-affected areas 
of Cabo Delgado region in Mozambique and Kivu region in the  Democratic Republic of the Congo. Elsewhere, conditions are 
favourable with near-normal yields expected, and well-above-average yields are possible in the Eastern Cape, Free State, and North 
West regions of South Africa. Additionally, planting of winter wheat is just beginning in Zimbabwe, South Africa, and Lesotho 
under favourable conditions.  
In Angola, deficits are particularly concerning in parts of the 
northwest and west, which recorded some of the lowest 
January, February, and March rains on the CHIRPS record. 
Conversely, western areas received heavy rains in early April 
that resulted in localized flooding but also helped to improve 
vegetation conditions and water reserves. However, it is too 
late in the season for significant crop improvement, and 
production outcomes are likely to be below average in parts 
of the centre and west. In Botswana, severe flooding between 
March 15 and 19 affected multiple areas of the Central district, 
though yield prospects remain favourable. In Zimbabwe, the 
2025/26 season was mixed, with southern parts of the country 
receiving above-normal rainfall while northern parts received 
generally normal rainfall. A significant mid -season dry spell 
beginning around January 25 and lasting through mid -
February 2026 resulted in crop wilting at critical physiological 
stages, particularly in parts of the east. However, s trong 
performance elsewhere in the country  is expected to offset 
these losses. In Malawi, most areas received above- average 
rainfall during the October 2025 to March 2026 rainy season. 
However, localized dry spells of three to four weeks impacted southern areas between January and February 2026, leading to average 
cumulative rainfall in those areas. Conversely, heavy rain in mid -March resulted in flash flooding in parts of the centre and south, 
resulting in some localized crop damage. Despite the dry spells and flooding impacts, overall harvest at the national level is expected 
to be average. In Mozambique, severe flooding in January in the southern part of the country was followed by a prolonged 40-day 
dry spell in February and March with high temperatures, and then a shift back to heavy rains in March that triggered localized flooding 
in the south and central areas. The sequential climatic shocks resulted in crop and livestock losses across parts of the south and central 
regions. Preliminary data indicate that 449,000 hectares of crops, representing 4.9 percent of the planted area, were affected, including 
maize, beans, and vegetables, particularly in Gaza, Maputo, and Sofala provinces. Additionally, limited seed availability and degraded 
soil conditions are further hindering replanting efforts. The 2025/26 harvest is expected to be near  average, though quantities will 
vary at the subnational level, with below-average amounts expected in the south, mixed amounts in the centre, and above-average 
amounts in the north. Atypical dry conditions are expected to persist through September.  Furthermore, conflict in Cabo Delgado 
continues to result in limited agricultural engagement.  In Madagascar, the G rand South region experienced cumulative rainfall 
deficits from early February to late April and atypically high temperatures since January, which led to one of the driest seasons on 
record, damaging short-cycle maize and bean crops. Additionally, in cyclone-affected areas along the northwest and eastern coast, 
prolonged flooding and widespread crop destruction present uncertainties for yield outcomes. Cyclone Fytia made landfall on the 
northwest coast of Madagascar on 31 January, flooding approximately 25,000 hectares primarily in Boeny and southern Sofia regions. 
Cyclone Gezani followed on 10 February, making landfall near Toamasina  on the east coast and flooding approximately 14,000 
hectares, with impacts concentrated in Alaotra Mangoro and extending into Atsinanana and Analamanga regions.  Conversely, rice 
crops are in the vegetative to reproductive stage under favourable conditions despite rainfall deficits received in some areas. In South 
Africa, conditions are mostly favourable to exceptional following above-normal rain during the summer growing season. However, 
in some eastern areas, particularly in the southern half of Mpumalanga, dry conditions in February had a negative impact on yellow 
maize production. The aggregate output of the 2026 maize crops is forecast at an above-average level between 16.8 million tonnes 
and 17.1 million tonnes, which would represent the third largest maize harvest on record. Generally conducive weather outcomes 
supported growing conditions this season, despite an extended dry spell in January followed by heavy downpours in February. Overall 
yields are expected to be near average, with well-above-average amounts possible in the Eastern Cape, Free State, and North West. 
Planting of winter wheat is just beginning, and above-normal rainfall in April over the summer and winter rainfall areas will support 
planting activities. However, plantings may be impacted by dry weather outcomes later in the season and an increase in input costs. 
Below-average cumulative rains are forecast during key crop development stages from July to August in the Western Cape, which 
produces about half the national output, and temperatures are also expected to be above average. Furthermore, the costs of inputs 
such as fuel and fertilizer have increased, which may discourage farmers from expanding the planted area. Most fuel and ferti lizer 
inputs are imported and account for nearly half of grain production costs across the country. Early estimates project 486,400 hectares 
of planted wheat for the 2026 production season, representing a 5.97 percent decrease from 517,300 hectares planted in 2025. This 
would represent the lowest planted area since 2015 as farmers shift towards more profitable crops. In Lesotho, favourable rains have 
supported growing conditions for staple foods, with a likely above -average harvest. The rains have also supported pasture 
For detailed description of the pie chart please see description box on Pg. 18
12 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
regeneration, improving household income access. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, main season sorghum and second 
season maize are at varying stages of development, with harvesting underway in the centre and southeast. Agro-climatic conditions 
remain favourable, and forecast average rains through June are expected to support normal crop development, except in the eastern 
provinces experiencing escalating conflict.  
Central & South Asia  
In Central & South Asia, harvesting of Rabi season wheat crops is just beginning in Pakistan, while winter wheat crops continue to 
develop across southern Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and Afghanistan, and conditions remain 
favourable for ongoing crop development. Additionally, planting of spring wheat is now underway across southern Kazakhstan , 
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan, and Mongolia, and early season conditions are favourable.  
In Afghanistan, consecutive years of drought and persistent high temperatures were followed by rainfall delays of up to two months 
for the start of the 2025/26 season, which negatively impacted winter rainfed wheat establishment. However, a shift to near-average 
precipitation from December 2025 through April 2026 resulted in significant soil moisture improvements and supported the grain-
filling and maturity stages in March and April, particularly in the rainfed belt. Most areas received below -average cumulative 
precipitation from October 2025 through April 2026, though some localized areas received average to above -average amounts. 
Conversely, some areas received widespread intense precipitation during late March to early April that resulted in localized flooding. 
Dry conditions returned in mid -April, and below-average precipitation is forecast through mid -May. The area under winter wheat 
decreased due to erratic precipitation received from October to December 2025. Conversely, the area under spring wheat increased, 
and planting was supported by widespread, timely, and geographically well-distributed rains received in late March to early April, 
according to field reports. The total area under wheat this se ason is near normal. Conditions are favourable for both irrigated and 
rainfed wheat, and the overall wheat harvest is expected to be near normal. All basins have below -average snow water equivalent 
(SWE) levels, except in a couple of basins during February and March. This will pose a concern for the second season crop (rice, maize, 
and cotton), as an expected decline in surface water will increase groundwater extraction. Snow water volume (SWV) levels are mixed 
as rainfall received in late March to early April resulted in normal levels in some basins, while others show below -normal levels, 
particularly in the northeast. This year, longer cold spots throughout the season resulted in a delay in the wheat harvest by around 
two weeks. Harvesting of early-sown wheat is underway in the central highlands and higher elevations of the northeast, and the timing 
of remaining harvesting activities will depend on location and elevation and will extend through August and early September in some 
Central Highland areas. In Pakistan, harvesting of Rabi season wheat is underway, and overall conditions are favourable. The wheat 
harvest is estimated between 29 and 29.3 million ton nes, which is near average  but slightly below last year due to production 
constraints in the Barani areas, where dry weather earlier in the season resulted in some crop losses. Land preparation for the maize 
season is underway, and crop performance will depend on the June to September monsoon performance. The expected El Niño could 
result in a weak and slow onset, which could negatively impact crop outcomes. However, flooding will likely not be as much of an 
issue compared to strong La Niña years.  
Crop condition map synthesizing wheat conditions as o f April 28th. Crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on a combination of inputs 
including remotely sensed data, ground observations, field reports, national, and regional experts. Crops that are in other than favourable conditions 
are labeled on the map with their driver.
13 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
Southeast Asi a
In southern Southeast Asia, wet-season rice is in the harvesting stage, and yield is expected to be favourable due to sufficient sunlight 
during the growing period.  Additionally, the area of wet -season maize is estimated to have decreased from the previou s season. 
Harvesting of wet-season maize is ongoing, and yield is expected to remain favourable with adequate irrigation water and sunlight 
during the growing period. Furthermore, planting of dry-season rice is underway with stable irrigation water supply. 
In northern Southeast Asia, the total planted area of dry -season rice is expected to decrease slightly compared to the last season. 
April is the peak month of dry -season rice harvesting, and 
the overall yield is expected to be favourable due to 
adequate weather conditions and consistent water supply. 
However, ongoing conflict in Cambodia resulted in 
decreased production due to a decline in the planted area, 
particularly in the northwest. Additionally, dry-season maize 
is currently in the harvesting stage, and harvesting work is 
expected to finalize over the next month. The overall yield 
and production are expected to increase compared with the 
previous season, supported by adequate irrigation 
throughout the growing season. Furthermore, s owing of 
wet-season rice has started in southern Viet Nam.  
Elsewhere in Southeast Asia, including Sri Lanka, Nepal, and 
Bangladesh, crops remain under mixed conditions , with 
recent heavy rains impacting Boro season rice in 
northeastern Bangladesh. 
In Indonesia, April is the fourth month of wet- season rice 
harvesting, with an estimated harvested area of 4.5 million 
Crop condition map synthesizing rice conditions as of April 28th. Crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on a combination of inputs 
including remotely sensed data, ground observations, field reports, national, and regional experts. Crops that are in other than favourable conditions 
are labeled on the map with their driver.  
For detailed description of the pie chart please see description box on Pg. 18.
14 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
hectares, which is slightly lower than last year. Yields are expected to be favourable, supported by adequate irrigation and sufficient 
sunlight during the flowering period. Additionally, April is the fourth month of wet-season maize harvesting, with a total harvested 
area of 1.03 million hectares, which is 3.8 percent lower than the previous season. The yield is expected to remain favourable due to 
adequate irrigation water and sufficient sunlight during the growing period. April is also typically the start of dry-season rice planting. 
However, the planted area remains relatively small at about 0.9 million hectares. Planted crops are in the vegetative and ear ly 
generative stages and are growing well due to adequate irrigation. Additionally, April is the first month of dry-season maize seeding, 
with a total sown area of 0.2 million hectares. Growing conditions are generally favourable due to sufficient irrigation wate r. In  
Malaysia, harvesting of wet-season rice is nearing completion, with 97 percent of the planted area harvested, and conditions remain 
favourable. Additionally, most wet -season maize fields are currently at the reproductive to grain -filling stages, while some later -
planted areas remain at the early reproductive stage. Crop conditions are generally favourable, supported by adequate residual soil 
moisture from earlier rainfall, and overall maize production prospects remain stable.  Furthermore, planting of dry- season rice is 
ongoing, with overall progress reaching 47 percent of the target area. Overall weather conditions and irrigation water supply remain 
stable and are supporting crop development. However, forecast below-normal rainfall in parts of Peninsular Malaysia and Sarawak 
may increase the risk of localized dry conditions.  In Brunei, harvesting of wet-season rice is nearing completion in irrigated areas, 
with a current yield of 3.4 metric tons per hectare, while harvesting in rainfed areas is 80 percent complete. The final yield of wet-
season rice is expected to be favourable. Planting of dry -season rice has just started, with 10 percent of the irrigated areas in the 
transplanting stage and the remaining area in the land preparation and seeding stage. The country is currently experiencing h igh 
solar radiation and low precipitation, though the overall cropping outlook remains favourable.  
In the Philippines, dry-season rice planted from November to December 2025 is now in the harvesting stage, with more than half 
the planted area harvested. Yield is expected to be 4.06 metric tons, representing a 0.7 percent decrease from the previous y ear. 
However, growing conditions are generally favourable. Additionally, dry-season maize planted from November to December 2025 is 
in the harvesting stage. Yield is expected to be 3.77 metric tons, representing a 1.3 percent increase from the previous year. Growing 
conditions for dry-season maize are generally favourable. In Thailand, the planted area of dry-season rice is estimated at 1.96 million 
hectares, representing a 3 percent decrease compared to last year. Crops are currently in the grain-filling and harvesting stages. As 
of April, around 70 percent of the planted area has been harvested. Total production of dry-season rice is expected to decline, mainly 
due to a reduction in the planted area. However, yields are expected to improve slightly, supported by adequate weather conditions 
during the growing period. Additionally, the planted area of dry -season maize is estimated at 93,400 hectares, representing a 3.8 
percent increase compared to last year. Dry-season maize crops are currently in the harvesting stage, and the cumulative harvested 
area reached 92 percent of the total pla nted area as of April. Total production is estimated at 5 million tons. Both maize yield and 
production are currently expected to increase compared with last year, supported by adequate irrigation throughout the growin g 
season and the use of high -quality seed varieties. In northern Viet Nam , dry-season (winter-spring) rice is in the tillering to early 
panicle initiation stages. Yield prospects are favourable, supported by conducive weather conditions and improved irrigation 
availability. Additionally, dry-season maize is in the reproductive stage, and conditions have improved from the previous month as 
adequate rainfall is supporting normal crop development. In the south, dry-season (winter-spring) rice is being harvested. As of April, 
0.6 million hectares have been harvested out of the total 1.9 million hectares planted, and the average yield is estimated at 6.9 tons 
per hectare. Additionally, dry-season maize is in the vegetative stage under favourable conditions. Furthermore, sowing of wet-season 
(summer-autumn) rice is underway along the Mekong Delta, with a planted area of 0.18 million hectares. In Laos, dry-season rice is 
in the grain filling to early harvesting stage. The harvested area reached 25 percent of the planted area, which is around 98 thousand 
hectares. The harvesting work is progressing faster than last year and is expected to finalize in May. Adequate irrigation water and 
conducive weather have supported harvesting. The production is expected to be about 443 thousand tons with an average yield of 
4.5 tons per hectare, representing a slight decrease compared to last year. Additionally, dry -season maize is in the mid -harvesting 
stage, and about 62 percent of the planted area of 9.7 thousand hectares has been harvested. Overall maize growing conditions are 
favourable due to adequate soil moisture from late February rainfall. However, some areas are experiencing localized pest problems 
and rainfall shortages, which may affect yields in specific areas. Harvesting work is progressing faster than the previous year and is 
expected to finalize by the end of May. Dry-season maize production is expected to be 50 thousand tons, with an average yield of 
5.06 tons per hectare, representing a slight increase compared to last year. In Myanmar, the planted area of dry-season rice is nearing 
completion with 1.05 million hectares, accounting for 92 percent of the national plan, and planted area is similar to last ye ar. Over 
450 thousand hectares of dry-season rice have been harvested, mainly in the delta region, with a favourable yield of 5.47 tons per 
hectare. Additionally, the sown area of dry-season maize reached 88.6 percent of the national target, which is less than the sown area 
of the previous year. Harvesting of dry-season maize finalized in April, and adequate weather conditions during the growing season 
supported favourable crop development. The final yield is reported at 4.5 tons per hectare, which is higher than last year. In Cambodia, 
dry-season rice is in the harvesting stage, and the final harvested area is expected to be 30 thousand h ectares, representing an 8 
percent decline compared to last year. Production is also expected to decrease by over 7 percent compared to last year due to  a 
decline in the planted area related to ongoing conflict, particularly in the northwest. However, overall yield is expected to remain 
favourable. Additionally, harvesting of dry-season maize reached more than 90 percent of the total cultivated area. The yield is 6.0 
tons per hectare, representing a slight increase compared to last year due to stable weather conditions. Furthermore, wet-season rice 
is in the field preparation stage, and planting will begin in May based on rainfall outcomes.  
In Sri Lanka, planting of Yala  season rice (40 percent of annual rice output) and Yala  season maize (10 percent of annual maize 
output) is just beginning under favourable agro -climatic conditions. Following damage from Cyclone Ditwah, the government
15 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
approved support for replanting efforts for 
affected field crops, fruits, vegetables, and 
minor export crops. The country is also 
experiencing prolonged and intensifying 
heat conditions, and high temperatures are 
expected to persist through at least mid -
May. Related water shortages may result in 
reduced agricultural output. Additionally, 
the pricing and availability of fertilizer are 
an emerging concern for the upcoming 
Yala (April to October) and Maha (October 
to March) seasons and could result in 
reduced agricultural output. In Nepal , 
harvesting of winter wheat continues, while 
planting of main season maize and spring 
season rice is underway. Overall conditions 
are favourable, and crops in the west have 
recovered from recent drier than normal 
conditions. In Bangladesh, harvesting of 
winter (Rabi) season maize and Rabi season 
wheat finalized in April under favourable 
conditions. Harvesting of Boro season rice  
(55 percent of annual rice output) is just 
beginning with concern in parts of the 
northeast as recent heavy rainfall resulted 
in flooding in the haor (wetland) regions of 
Sylhet, Sunamganj, Moulvibazar, Habiganj, Netrokona, and Kishoreganj districts, and multiple rivers are at or above pre -monsoon 
danger levels. According to the Department of Agricultural Extension, 58 percent of farmers have harvested the paddy crop in the 
haor region, which comprises 20 percent of total Boro  season rice production, and 17 percent of standing crops remain at risk of 
flooding. Harvesting activities are stalled in affected areas due to labour shortages and waterlogged fields that prevent mac hinery 
use. Elsewhere, harvesting prospects are favourable. Additionally, planting of summer ( Kharif) season maize (15 percent of annual 
maize production) and Aus  season rice (10 percent of annual rice production) continues under favourable conditions. In the 
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, winter wheat and barley broke dormancy in March and are now in the very early stage of 
growth. Maize plantings began in April under drier than normal conditions, particularly in the north, including areas of Pyongan Bukto, 
Pyongan Namdo, and Hamgyng Namdo, which received 50 percent of normal rainfall in March. Water trucks are being dispatched to 
rural areas to improve irrigation of large crop fields. However, it is too early to detect whether this had any impact on crop conditions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crop condition map synthesizing maize conditions as of  April 28th. Crop conditions over the main 
growing areas are based on a combination of inputs including remotely sensed data, ground 
observations, field reports, national, and regional experts. Conditions that are other than 
favourable are labeled on the map with their driver.
16 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
Central America & the Caribbea n  
In Central America, land preparation for the Primera season maize and bean crops is underway across Honduras, El Salvador, and 
Nicaragua, and planting is just beginning in Guatemala with concern for the start of the season due to erratic rains and high daytime 
temperatures recorded in 2026 that have intensified vegetation dryness. In addition, forecasts indicate elevated risks of below-normal 
rainfall in Central America and the Carib bean during May to July  due to the forecast El Niño and warming trends in the region, 
heightening concerns for the 2026 Primera season crops (See Regional Outlook Pg. 17). Dry conditions would likely affect sowing 
activities for small and subsistence farmers and irrigation availability for large farmers. Furthermore, some farmers will re duce the 
application of agrochemicals due to increased international costs of fertilizers and pesticides. Even if normal rains are received, there 
will likely be negative implications for yields and market prices due to reduced agrochemical application.  
In Honduras, harvesting of second season rice finalized in April, while planting of main season rice is just beginning, and overall rice 
conditions are favourable. However, erratic and below -average rainfall received in early 2026 continued through March and is 
expected to intensify during the Primera season (See Regional Outlook Pg. 17). A combination of irregular and below-average rainfall 
and high temperatures is expected to result in a prolonged canícula dry spell and accelerated soil‑moisture loss. These conditions 
may constrain Primera planting and early development, particularly for subsistence farmers in Dry Corridor areas without irrigation 
access. 
In Haiti, main season rice is in the vegetative to reproductive sta ge, while planting of Printemps  season beans continues. Above-
average rainfall since the start of the Printemps  season in March and early April is supporting normal crop development, irrigation 
availability, and generally average to above -average vegetation conditions. Artibonite, the main rice- growing area, received good 
rains that enabled sowing. However, prolonged insecurity continues to restrict access to land and agricultural labour, limiting income 
opportunities, and input access also remains limited due to high prices and logistical constraints. As a result of these chal lenges, 
farmers may reduce cultivated areas. In Cuba, harvesting of second season maize finalized in April while harvesting of second season 
rice crops (1/3 of annual rice production) is just beginning. Additionally, planting of main season rice is now underway. Des pite 
generally favourable agro-climatic conditions, second season rice yields are expected to be below average, and there is concern for 
ongoing harvesting and planting activities as the country has faced a severe reduction in fuel availability since January, affecting 
electricity generation, transportation, and essential logistics. Due to the rise in international oil prices, the government raised the price 
of domestic fuel, leading to higher transportation and distribution costs and exacerbating the pressure on already high fuel prices. In 
Pinar del Rio, there is evidence of rotting crops in the fields and crops not being timely processed and transported to markets.  
 
Crop condition map synthesizing maize conditions as of April 28th. Crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on a combination of inputs 
including remotely sensed data, ground observations, field reports, national, and regional experts. Conditions that are other than favourable are 
labeled on the map with their driver.
17 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
 
Season al Forecast Alert : Elevated chances of below - average rainfall and above -
average temperatures   
Below-average rainfall is forecast for late April to early May 2026 in portions of Central America and in the Caribbean. Below -
average rainfall and above-average temperatures will likely occur throughout the next 6 months, based on seasonal climate model 
forecasts raising concerns for Primera season crops. During April 1st to April 25th there were minor rainfall deficits in portions of 
central Guatemala, northern Honduras, western El Salvador, and eastern Nicaragua. In Haiti, southern, central and northeast ern 
areas were wetter than average. El Salvador experienced a heat wave during mid-April. 
Rainfall forecasts for late April and into early May indicate that rainfall deficits may develop regionally during coming weeks. Several 
sub seasonal forecasts point to below-average rainfall conditions during late April to early May in southern-central Guatemala, El 
Salvador, Honduras, western Nicaragua, and the Caribbean. There is low confidence in the severity of impacts, due to model 
differences, nevertheless the below average and erratic rainfall distribution is affecting the usual SOS over many areas of Central 
America, especially in small and subsistence farmers of basic grains, due to the good rainfall performance in Haiti during Ma rch 
and early April favor a normal development of crops.. The ECMWF forecast from April 29th indicates that drier -than-average 
conditions could continue into mid-May. An early season rainfall anomaly outlook, which includes the 15-day forecast from April 
26th and preliminary data for earlier weeks, indicates that April 1st to May 10th rainfall totals may be 25 mm to 50 mm below 
average across much of northern Central America and 50 to 100 mm below average in western and central-northern Guatemala, 
El Salvador, and western Honduras (Figure 1 middle-left). The early season rainfall amounts and distribution and forecast above-
normal temperatures could lead to slow gains in soil moisture and some farmers may delay planting Primera season crops.  
There will be elevated risks of below -normal rainfall in Central America and the Caribbean during May to September 2026, and 
beyond. This means that multiple cropping seasons could potentially experience adverse dry and hot weather conditions this year, 
during the 2026 Primera, Printemps, and Segunda rainfall seasons. These hazards are indicated by multiple seasonal climate 
forecasts, including ECMWF and NMME forecasts (Figure 1 middle-right), WMO, and C3S multi-model ensembles. Based on April 
initial condition forecasts, there are greater-than 50 percent chances of below-normal May to July (MJJ) 2026 rainfall in southern 
and eastern Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and central-southern Caribbean areas. Models showed more agreement 
(60 to 70 percent chances) of below-normal MJJ 2026 rainfall in Central America’s Pacific coast regions and in Haiti. Longer-range 
NMME rainfall forecasts are pessimistic through November 2026. Models are highly confident (greater than 80 percent chances) 
that regional temperatures during the next six months will be much warmer than normal . Higher temperatures speed the 
evaporation of soil moisture, and increase risks of crop stress during dry spells and from pests and disease, early appearanc e of 
pests has been reported over areas of Central America. 
Expectations of El Niño conditions are the main driver of these outlooks. Warming trends in the region also contribute to the high 
odds of hotter -than-normal temperatures. El Niños tend to have a regional drying influence, though events can have variable 
impacts. During nine past years when El Niño was active during June to September (JJAS), historical rainfall data show that JJ AS 
precipitation totals were below-normal more often in Guatemala, El Salvador, western and central Honduras, western Nicaragua, 
and Haiti, while drying influences were less common in eastern areas of both Honduras and Nicaragua (Figure 1 right). The NOAA 
CPC April 2026 official ENSO outlook predicts 61 percent chances of El Niño criteria being met during May to July 2026, and ~90 
percent chances from August 2026 to January 2027.  
The 2026 Atlantic Hurricane season will likely be less active than normal due to the El Niño event, according to the Colorado State 
University Extended Range Forecast. Associated with that forecast are lower chances of hurricane landfall in the Caribbean. 
 
 
Figure 1. Recent rainfall anomaly and a forecast -based outlook, rainfall probability forecast for May to July 2026, and historical June to 
September rainfall during El Niño events. Left and middle -left: CHC Early Estimates, which show preliminary and preliminary + forecast rainfall 
for April 1st to 25th, 2026, and April 1st to May 10th, 2026, respectively. Estimated differences from the 1996- 2025 average, for each time period, are 
shown in both. These use CHIRPS3 data. A bias-adjusted NCEP GEFS forecast (CHIRPS3-GEFS) is used for the 15-day forecast from April 26th. Middle-
right: Multi-model ensemble forecast for the probability of below -normal, normal, and above-normal May to July 2026 rainfall, based on April initial 
conditions, ECMWF and 6 NMME models, and a 1991-2020 baseline of model hindcasts. NMME data is from the IRI Data Library; ECMWF data is from 
Copernicus. Right: The frequency of below -normal June -to-September rainfall during years with concurrent El Niño conditions (1982, 1987, 1991, 
1994, 1997, 2002, 2004, 2015, 2023), relative to 1991- 2020 CHIRPS3 terciles. In areas with orange to dark red colors, below -normal rains occurred in 
four to nine years (40 to 100%). From UCSB CHC . Source: UCSB Climate Hazards Center
18 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
 
 
 Sources and Disclaimers:  
The Crop Monitor assessment is conducted by GEOGLAM with inputs from the following partners FEWS NET, JRC, WFP, ARC, AFSIS, MESA, ICPAC, FAO GIEWS, Applied Geosolutions and UMD. The findings 
and conclusions in this joint multi-agency report are consensual statements from the GEOGLAM experts, and do not necessarily reflect those of the individual agencies represented by these experts.  
More detailed information on the GEOGLAM crop assessments is available at www.cropmonitor.org 
 
 
 
Appendix 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i 
Crop Conditions:  
 
Exceptional: Crop conditions are above average, with crop yields estimated at 
10% or more above average. This label is used during the grain-filling through 
harvest stages. 
Favourable: Crop conditions range from slightly below to slightly above average at 
reporting time, with crop yields estimated within 10% of average. 
Watch: Crop conditions are not far from average, but there is a potential risk to 
final yields. There is still time and possibility for the crop to recover to average 
conditions if the ground situation improves. This label is used during the planting–
early vegetative and the vegetative–reproductive stages. 
Poor: Crop conditions are below average, with crop yields estimated at between 
10% and 25% below average. This label is used during the grain -filling through 
harvest stages when crops are not likely to recover. 
Failure: Crop conditions are well below average, with crop yields estimated at 25% 
or more below average. This label is used during the grain -filling through harvest 
stages when crops are not likely to recover. 
Out of Season: Crops are not currently planted or in development during this time. 
No Data: No reliable source of data is available at this time. 
 
* ”Average” refers to the average conditions over the past 5 years. 
 
Note: In areas where conflict is a driver of crop condition, crop conditions are 
compared to the pre-conflict average rather than the average conditions over the past 
5 years. In areas where conflict is protracted and based on expert analysis on a case 
by case basis, crop conditions will be compared to the average conditions over the 
past five years.  
 
 
 
 
 
Pie Chart Description: Each slice represents a country’s share of total regional production. The proportion within each national slice is colored 
according to the crop conditions within a specific growing area; grey indicates that the respective area is out of season. Se ctions within each slide are 
weighted by the sub-national production statistics (5 -year average) of the respective country. The section within each national slice also accounts for 
multiple cropping seasons (i.e. spring and winter wheat) and  are a result of combining totals from multiple seasons to represent the total yearly 
national production. When conditions are other than favourable icons are added that provide information on the key climatic d rivers affecting 
conditions. 
 
Information on crop conditions in the main 
production and export countries can be found 
in the Crop Monitor for AMIS, published May 7, 
2026.
19 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crop Season Nomenclature: 
In countries that contain multiple cropping seasons for the same crop, the following charts identifies the national season name associated 
with each crop season within the Crop Monitor for Early Warning. 
 
 
Country Crop Season 1 Name Se ason 2 Name Season 3 Name
Burundi Maize Season B Se ason A
Burundi Rice Season B
Ethiopia Maize Meher season B elg season
Kenya Maize Long Rains S hort Rains
Rwanda Maize Season B Se ason A
Somalia Maize Gu Season D eyr Season
Somalia Sorghum Gu Season D eyr Season
South Sudan Maize First Season
South Sudan Millet First Season
South Sudan Sorghum First Season
Uganda Maize First Season Se cond Season
United Republic of Tanzania Maize
Bimodal: Masika 
U
nimodal: Msimu Vuli
United Republic of Tanzania Millet
Bimodal: Masika 
U
nimodal: Msimu
United Republic of Tanzania Rice
Bimodal: Masika 
U
nimodal: Msimu
United Republic of Tanzania Sorghum
Bimodal: Masika 
U
nimodal: Msimu Vuli
United Republic of Tanzania Wheat
Bimodal: Masika 
U
nimodal: Msimu
East Africa
Country Crop Season 1 Name Season 2 Name Season 3 Name
Benin Maize Main season Second season
Cameroon Maize Main season Second season
Cote d'Ivoire Maize Main season Second season
Ghana Maize Main season Second season
Mali Rice Main season Off-season
Mauritania Rice Main season Off-season
Nigeria Maize Main season Short season
Nigeria Rice Main season Off-season
Togo Maize Main season Second season
West Africa
Drivers: 
These represent the key climatic drivers that are having an impact on crop condition 
status. They result in production impacts and can act as either positive or negative 
drivers of crop conditions. 
 
Wet: Higher than average wetness. 
Dry: Drier than average. 
Hot: Hotter than average. 
Cool: Cooler than average or risk of frost damage. 
Extreme Events: This is a catch-all for all other climate risks (i.e. hurricane, typhoon, 
frost, hail, winterkill, wind damage, etc.) 
Delayed-Onset: Late start of the season. 
Pest & Disease: Destructive insects, birds, animals, or plant disease. 
Socio-economic: Social or economic factors that impact crop conditions (i.e. policy 
changes, agricultural subsidies, government intervention, etc.) 
Conflict: Armed conflict or civil unrest that is preventing the planting, working, or 
harvesting of the fields by the farmers.
20 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Crop Season 1 Name Se ason 2 Name Season 3 Name
Egypt Maize Summer-planted N ili season (Nile Flood)
Egypt Rice Summer-planted N ili season (Nile Flood)
Middle East & North Africa
Country Crop Season 1 Name Se ason 2 Name Season 3 Name
Democratic Republic of the Congo Maize Main season Se cond season
Mozambique Maize Main season Se cond season
Southern Africa
Country Crop Season 1 Name Season 2 Name Season 3 Name
Afghanistan Wheat Winter-planted Spring-planted
Afghanistan Maize Second season
Afghanistan Rice Second season
Kazakhstan Wheat Winter-planted Spring-planted
Kyrgyzstan Wheat Winter-planted Spring-planted
Pakistan Rice Kharif (summer)
Pakistan Wheat Rabi
Tajikistan Wheat Winter-planted Spring-planted
Central and South Asia
Country Crop Season 1 Name Season 2 Name Season 3 Name
Bangladesh Maize Winter (Rabi) Summer (Kharif)
Bangladesh Rice Boro Aman Aus
Bangladesh Wheat Rabi
Cambodia Maize Wet-season Dry-season
Cambodia Rice Wet-season Dry-season
Indonesia Maize Wet-season Dry-season
Indonesia Rice Wet-season Dry-season
Lao People's Democratic Republic Maize Wet-season Dry-season
Lao People's Democratic Republic Rice Wet-season Dry-season
Myanmar Maize Wet-season Dry-season
Myanmar Rice Wet-season Dry-season
Nepal Rice Main season Spring season
Philippines Maize Wet-season Dry-season
Philippines Rice Wet-season Dry-season
Sri Lanka Maize Maha Yala
Sri Lanka Rice Maha Yala
Thailand Maize Wet-season Dry-season
Thailand Rice Wet-season Dry-season
Viet Nam Rice
North: Other wet-season (summer-
autumn) 
South: Other wet-season (autumn-
winter and seasonal)
Dry-season (winter-spring)
North: Main wet-season (seasonal) 
South: Main wet-season (summer-
autumn)
Southeast Asia
Country Crop Season 1 Name Season 2 Name Season 3 Name
Cuba Rice Main season Second season
El Salvador Beans Primera Postrera
El Salvador Maize Primera Segunda
Guatemala Beans Primera Postrera Apante
Guatemala Maize Primera Segunda
Haiti Beans Printemps Été Hiver
Haiti Maize Printemps Été
Haiti Rice Main season Second season
Honduras Beans Primera Postrera
Honduras Maize Primera Segunda
Nicaragua Beans Primera Postrera Apante
Nicaragua Maize Primera Segunda
Central America & Caribbean
21 No. 112 – April 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cover Photo by : Pixabay  
2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning release dates: 
5 February, 5 March, 2 April, 7 May, 4 June, 2 July, 6 August,  
3 September, 1 October, 5 November, 3 December  
 
www.cropmonitor.org 
@GEOGLAM  Crop Monitor  
 
 
Prepared by members of the GEOGLAM Community of Practice, 
coordinated by the University of Maryland Center for Global 
Agricultural Research and funded through NASA Harvest.  
The Crop Monitor is a part of 
GEOGLAM, a GEO global initiative.
22 No. 115 – May 2026 Crop Monitor for Early Warning 
 
   The Crop Monitor for Early Warning is a part of GEOGLAM,  
a GEO global initiative. www.cropmonitor.org  
 
 
Contributing  partner s  
*EC contribution is provided by the Joint Research Centr e of the European Commission