Israeli police have opened an investigation after CCTV footage showed a border police officer throwing a stun grenade into a car carrying young Palestinians during a raid on the Qalandiya refugee camp in the occupied 
West Bank
.
The footage from Sunday, released by the Israeli rights group B’Tselem, shows an officer approaching a car and shouting at its occupants.
After a brief exchange, he reaches for his belt, grabs a stun grenade and 
throws it through the open door
, which he pushes shut as the driver tries to get out. The officer is heard shouting: “Shut your mouth. Who are you talking to like that?”
Moments later, the grenade detonates, filling the area with smoke. The two passengers scramble out through the opposite side of the vehicle and the officer appears to fire his rifle as they duck for cover. B’Tselem said all those who were in the car survived.
Police said the officer acted “not in accordance with procedure” and that the justice ministry’s department for the investigation of police officers was handling the case. The officer 
has been suspended
 pending the investigation.
Stun grenades are designed to disorient with an intense flash and deafening blast but can inflict serious injuries, particularly when they explode at close range.
Since 2020, Israeli soldiers and settlers have killed at least 1,175 Palestinian civilians in the occupied West Bank, at least 
a quarter of whom were children
, 
UN data
 shows. No one has been charged over any of these deaths.
During the same raid on the refugee camp, Israeli forces 
shot and killed a 16-year-old boy
, Walid Abu Sneineh, and wounded three other Palestinians, the Palestinian health ministry said. It added that two Palestinian children were injured after being shot in the lower limbs by Israeli forces during the same incident.
The Israeli military did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Get in touch
Contact us about this story
The best public interest journalism relies on first-hand accounts from people in the know. If you have something to share on this subject, you can contact us confidentially using the following methods:
Secure Messaging in the Guardian app
The Guardian app has a tool to send tips about stories. Messages are end to end encrypted and concealed within the routine activity that every Guardian mobile app performs. This prevents an observer from knowing that you are communicating with us at all, let alone what is being said.
If you don’t already have the Guardian app, download it (
iOS
/
Android
) and go to the menu. Select ‘Secure Messaging’. 
SecureDrop
If you can safely use the tor network without being observed or monitored you can send messages and documents to the Guardian via our 
SecureDrop platform.
Our guide at 
theguardian.com/tips
 lists several ways to contact us securely, and discusses the pros and cons of each. 
Show more
Late on Sunday, a 
four-month-old Palestinian baby
, Ahmad Marouf Zaid, died after Israeli forces 
blocked
 his family from crossing a checkpoint to reach a waiting ambulance, his family told the Guardian.
They drove the severely ill baby on unpaved and mountainous back roads to Ramallah themselves, which delayed treatment by more than an hour.
An IDF spokesperson denied blocking the family from crossing to seek medical aid.
Last week, during another Israeli military raid in Ramallah, the military 
killed a 15-year-old boy
, Amir Ahmad Jaber.
Yuli Novak, the executive director of B’Tselem, said: “The widespread and unprecedented killing of Palestinian children and teenagers in the West Bank is the result of a broader Israeli policy that allows the killing of Palestinians and violent abuse against them without any accountability.”