United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 
 
Highlights 
 Following the 24 June earthquakes of magnitude 7.2 and 7.5 (18:00 local 
time), authorities report more than 1,170 aftershocks. 
 Official toll: 4,333 people dead and 16,740 injured. 
 A total of 6,462 people have been rescued. 
 Tom Fletcher, the United Nation s humanitarian chief, concluded his 
four-day visit to the country and called for sustained international 
support for the Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP). 
 An additional appeal for US$298  million was launched to scale up the 
earthquake response and address the multisectoral needs of 1.3 million 
people over the next six months. 
 The United Nations system and its partner organizations, in coordination with 
the Government, are responding with multisectoral actions and will continue to scale up assistance to 
affected people. 
 
Situation overview 
Venezuela is facing a national 
emergency following two consecutive 
high-magnitude earthquakes (7.2 and 
7.5) that struck on 24 June (18:00 local 
time) in the north- central region, with 
the epicentre located along the San 
Felipe–Yumare–Montalbán axis 
(Yaracuy/Carabobo). Authorities 
report 1,171 aftershocks. 
 
Seventeen days after the earthquakes, 
authorities report a toll of 4,333 people 
dead, 16,740 injured and 6,462 
rescued since the onset  of the 
emergency. Authorities also indicated 
that 17,907 people remain without 
housing. According to official reports, 
315 of those who died have yet to be 
identified, while search operations for possible survivors remain active at priority sites. 
 
The Government response remains focused on search operations, the management of transitional camps 
and assistance to affected populations. The United Nations and its partner organizations, in coordination 
with the authorities, continue implementing multisectoral response activities and scaling up assistance. 
United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator Tom 
Fletcher concluded his visit to Venezuela this week and called on the international community to sust ain 
support for the humanitarian response. In this context, he  announced a US$298 million addendum to 
the Humanitarian Response Plan, aimed at addressing the multisectoral needs of 1.3 million people 
over the next six months. 
 
 Situation Report No. 18 
 Earthquakes in Venezuela 
 11 July 2026 
 Time: 9:00 pm 
 
4,333 
16,740 
Dead 
people 
 
Injured 
people
OCHA | 2 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
Impact on infrastructure 
 Authorities report at least 856 affected buildings, including 190 that have collapsed.  
 As part of recovery and reconstruction planning, authorities have identified 40 sites in La Guaira 
State, covering approximately 584,000 square metres, for the development of housing projects 
intended for affected populations.  
 An initial assessment by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) indicates 
that direct damage to housing and infrastructure amounts to approximately US$37 billion. Most of 
the damage, estimated at around US$24 billion, is concentrated in housing, businesses, schools, 
hospitals, and public facilities. Meanwhile, preliminary estimates by UNDP indicate direct physical 
damage of US$6.7 billion, equivalent to 6 per cent of GDP. 
 
National response 
 The Government response remains focused on search and rescue operations, as well as assistance 
to affected people. 
 According to authorities, the response continues with 94 transitional camps supporting affected 
populations, with a capacity of 24,129 people and a current occupancy of 18,437 people. As of 
11 July, 40 camps are located in Caracas, 28 in La Guaira and 26 in Miranda. 
 Authorities are advancing a unified registration process for affected families in transitional camps 
through the collection of biometric and contact information to support assistance management, social 
support programmes and housing solutions. 
 Authorities report that 86,794 families have received some form of assistance since the onset of the 
emergency. 
 The Government of Venezuela announced the creation of an initial reconstruction fund equivalent to 
US$200 million. 
 A psychosocial support hotline remains available for affected people: 0800-AYUDA-01. 
 A digital form has been launched by the National Council for Persons with Disabilities (CONAPDIS) 
to support a timely and inclusive response in affected areas. 
 Mechanisms have been established to locate missing persons (www.localizapacientes.com) and to 
report affected individuals (0-800-RESCATE). 
 Authorities have resumed administrative activities in states not affected by the earthquakes and in 
areas where educational infrastructure shows no visible damage. Meanwhile, school activities 
remain suspended in affected municipalities across the states of Aragua (Santiago Mariño, Girardot, 
Ocumare de la Costa de Oro and Tovar); Carabobo (Juan José Mora, Puerto Cabello, Naguanagua 
and Valencia); Falcón (José Laurencio Silva); La Guaira (Vargas); the Capital District (Libertador); 
and Miranda (Chacao, Barut a, El Hatillo, Sucre, Plaza, Zamora, Acevedo, Brión, Buroz, Páez, 
Andrés Bello and Pedro Gual). 
 
Situation by state 
Capital District (Caracas) and Miranda  
 In Miranda State, a capacity-strengthening session on protection and transitional camp management 
was conducted on 11 July for coordinators of sites managed by the State Government. The activity 
was organized by the Protection Cluster, the Child Protection and Gender-Based Violence Areas of 
Responsibility (AoRs), the Infrastructure and Temporary Accommodation Working Group and 
OCHA, with support from Cedesex, PAHO, Cecodap, UNFPA, UNICEF, COOPI and UN Women. 
 In Chacao Municipality, authorities reported that technical infrastructure assessments remain 
ongoing, with 26 buildings currently undergoing specialized review. 
 
Response actions: Three (3) VHF- funded organizations operating in municipalities across Miranda 
State and the Capital District (Cedesex, Construyendo Futuros and FUNDANA) are supporting the initial 
response through general protection, child protection and gender -based violence (GBV) services.  In 
addition, organizations such as Tinta Violeta, FUNDANA and World Vision are providing protection 
support to affected families, particularly through psychosocial assistance.
OCHA | 3 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
La Guaira 
 Authorities and humanitarian organizations continue strengthening the response in La Guaira’s 
transitional camps through the expansion of multisectoral services, improvements in accommodation 
conditions and coordinated assistance management. During the reporting period, progress was 
made in the distribution of essential items, registration and protection activities, health and 
psychosocial support interventions, as well as actions to improve access to safe water, sanitation, 
connectivity and community infrastructure. 
 
Response actions: Five (5) partners of the Venezuela Humanitarian Fund (VHF) are supporting the 
response through primary health care and psychological support services (Fundación Proyecto 
Maniapure, Paluz, Ven Da Tu Mano, Venezuelan Red Cross and Tinta Violeta). 
 
Carabobo and Yaracuy (epicentral zone) 
 In Carabobo, the most significant impacts continue to be concentrated in Juan José Mora 
municipality (Morón parish). In Yaracuy, particularly in Veroes municipality and other localities near 
the epicentral area, homes have been reported as destroyed or at high risk. Recent assessments 
have identified priority needs in protection, mental health and psychosocial support, health, shelter, 
water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), and food security. 
 
Response actions: Five organizations (Venezuelan Red Cross, CESAP, Tierra Viva, Cáritas Morón 
and Empodérame) are providing response in health, food, water and the distribution of humanitarian 
assistance. 
 
Falcón (Tucacas – Silva municipality) 
 In Silva Municipality, localized flooding was reported in parts of Boca de Aroa as a result of high surf 
conditions, affecting communities previously impacted by the earthquakes and by soil liquefaction 
phenomena. Local authorities continue to monitor the situation and implement preventive measures 
to reduce risks to the population. 
 The situation highlights a multi -hazard scenario in Silva Municipality, where earthquake -related 
impacts are compounded by coastal events, increasing protection, WASH, psychosocial support and 
early recovery needs. 
 OCHA continues to coordinate with Civil Protection and Local Coordination Forum (LCF) partners to 
monitor the situation, verify humanitarian needs and identify potential complementary support 
actions. 
 
Response actions: The capacity-building activities led by the Subnational Protection Cluster continue, 
alongside the operational agenda in Boca de Aroa, which has been expanded at the request of regional 
authorities to include Palmasola Municipality. Activities focus on WASH and psychosocial support and are 
being implemented by Action Against Hunger, Azul Positivo, IOM, Centroccidente, ODISEF and AVSI, in 
coordination with regional authorities. 
 
Other states 
 Amazonas: Authorities report the arrival of 75 people from La Guaira, all hosted by local families. 
At least 20 are considered highly vulnerable and require support with food, clothing and essential 
household items. The situation is further compounded by ongoing rains and flooding, which are 
increasing humanitarian needs. 
 Anzoátegui: In Simón Rodríguez Municipality (El Tigre), assistance is being provided to more than 
27 affected people staying with relatives. Although the locality has received more than 120 people 
from earthquake-affected areas, most have continued onward to Pariaguán, Maturín and Bolívar. 
The response is focused on medical care, food assistance and essential relief items. 
 Apure: Authorities report the arrival of more than 230 affected people. The LCF plans to deploy 
complementary health, psychosocial support and WASH activities.
OCHA | 4 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 Bolívar: A preventive accommodation site with a capacity of 120 people remains available through 
the State Government. At the same time, psychological support and psychological first aid services 
are being strengthened for people affected by the emergency. 
 Delta Amacuro: Assistance continues for 98 people relocated from Caracas and La Guaira, mainly 
through family reunification processes. Identified needs are concentrated in MHPSS and 
displacement monitoring. Authorities and humanitarian organizations are organizing multis ervice 
assistance activities that will include food assistance, hygiene kits, health support and protection 
services. As part of these efforts, WFP plans to distribute food baskets to 52 people, World Vision 
will complement the response with 22 food rations, and Cáritas Delta Amacuro will distribute 52 
hygiene kits. 
 Nueva Esparta: The Municipality of Arismendi implemented a comprehensive support plan for 17 
affected people, including children, youth and older persons, who are staying with relatives. 
Assistance includes medical care, medicines, psychosocial support, host family regis tration and 
assessment of basic needs. 
 Sucre: Authorities report the relocation of 641 people, primarily from La Guaira and Caracas, of 
whom 187 moved independently and 454 received institutional support for transportation. Response 
activities include reception, registration, medical care, psychosocial support and protection services, 
with particular attention to children, adolescents, older persons and other vulnerable groups. 
 Trujillo: Authorities report 102 relocated families from La Guaira and Caracas across 14 
municipalities. Most remain accommodated with relatives or community support networks and have 
needs related to food assistance, health, protection and livelihood recovery. 
 Zulia: Assistance continues for people affected by the earthquakes who arrived from La Guaira and 
Caracas, primarily through the Maracaibo bus terminal. The Citizen Assistance Office and 
ASONACOP, together with the Venezuelan Red Cross, HIAS, CESVI, ASOREZ and C áritas, 
continue operating a unified service point providing food assistance, legal support and hygiene kits. 
In addition, ASONACOP expanded assistance to displaced families in Jesús Enrique Lossada, 
Jesús María Semprún, Machiques, Rosario de Perijá and Mara municipalities, in coordination with 
Municipal Councils for the Rights of Children and Adolescents and Protection Councils. The assisted 
population is mainly composed of women, children, adolescents and older persons, including 
pregnant women and families whose homes were completely destroyed. While some remain in the 
state, others continue onward to Colombia. 
 
Humanitarian coordination 
 The United Nations Under -Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief 
Coordinator, Tom Fletcher, concluded his visit to Venezuela on Friday. In addition to meeting with 
affected people, humanitarian personnel and national authorities, he met with private sector leaders 
and representatives of the diplomatic community to discuss the transition from emergency response 
to recovery and reconstruction. He also called for continued support to the Humanitarian Response 
Plan (HRP) to help address the most urgent needs. 
 OCHA, together with the Humanitarian Coordinator and in coordination with national authorities, 
continues to coordinate the humanitarian response with the United Nations and partner 
organizations, prioritizing actions in health, shelter, food security, WASH, logistics and protection. In 
this context, the United Nations system held a working meeting with the Single Authority for 
Operation Rescue and Hope 2026 to review priority needs, strengthen inter-institutional coordination 
and follow up on joint earthquake response efforts. 
 UNDAC and OCHA continued supporting Civil Protection in strengthening emergency coordination 
and information management capacities, including technical exchanges on USAR coordination 
mechanisms and operational tracking tools. 
 OCHA continued strengthening coordination with the private sector to support response and early 
recovery efforts, promoting engagement with specialized actors in areas such as logistics, debris 
management, infrastructure rehabilitation and reconstruction planning through existing coordination 
mechanisms between the United Nations and the private sector. 
 Venezuelan authorities requested the activation of the Post -Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) 
within the framework of the United Nations system and with the support of UNDP. In line with the
OCHA | 5 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
internationally recognized PDNA methodology, the corresponding coordination efforts with relevant 
counterparts will be advanced. 
 Authorities informed the activation of a special mechanism to expedite the processing of a “Work 
Visa for Special Situations” through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The procedure will be carried out 
online under the coordination of the Office of the Vice Minister for Multilateral Affairs and the Consular 
Affairs Office. It is intended for foreign personnel of international organizations, as well as United 
Nations staff, deploying to Venezuela in support of the response to the earthquake emergency.  
 
Initial humanitarian response 
Food Security 
 As of 11 July, WFP has provided food assistance to more than 60,000 people affected by the 24 
June earthquakes, helping sustain the emergency response across affected communities. WFP 
continues to expand its assistance through ready-to-eat rations, family food baskets and hot meals. 
During the reporting period, 5,498 ready -to-eat individual rations  were distributed in the Capital 
District and La Guaira State, along with 364 family food baskets in the communities of Urimare 
(reaching 1,456 people) and 200 fa mily food baskets for meal preparation in a camp in Libertador 
Municipality, benefiting 800 people. 
 WFP-supported kitchens remained operational in transitional camps in La Guaira, where 7,262 hot 
meals were served (3,242 in Polideportivo Vargas, 2,795 in Estadio César Nieves and 1,225 in Playa 
Grande), helping meet the food needs of displaced and affected populations. 
 
Health 
 In Polideportivo Vargas, IOM -supported mobile health teams reached a cumulative total of 917 
consultations since the start of the response, including general medicine, paediatrics, internal 
medicine and psychological first aid (PFA). 
 UNICEF provided 113 primary health-care consultations in Polideportivo Vargas and Playa Grande 
transitional camps and supported vaccination campaigns in Polideportivo Vargas and Estadio César 
Nieves, where 83 doses of tetanus and yellow fever vaccines were administered. 
 UNFPA reached 142 people through sexual and reproductive health (SRH) activities, including 
community awareness sessions, antenatal consultations and access to contraceptive methods in 
transitional camps across La Guaira. 
 International Medical Corps (IMC) continues to deploy three Mobile Medical Units in La Guaira, 
providing primary health care, sexual and reproductive health services, and mental health and 
psychosocial support (MHPSS). Between 1 and 9 July, the units conducted 1,024 consultations in 
affected communities, primarily related to non-communicable diseases (44 per cent), communicable 
diseases (37 per cent), mental health and psychosocial support needs (8 per cent), sexual and 
reproductive health (7 per cent), and trauma or injuries (4 per cent). IMC also continues supporting 
access to safe water and is advancing the deployment of a Type 1 Emergency Medical Team (EMT) 
in Catia La Mar to strengthen health response capacity. 
 
Logistics and Telecommunications 
 WFP received a charter flight at Simón Bolívar International Airport in Maiquetía carrying 30 metric 
tons of emergency response equipment, including Mobile Storage Units (MSUs), generators and 
other logistics supplies to strengthen the operational capacity of the response. The flight also 
transported 3 metric tons of shelter and housing supplies provided by GOAL. 
 WFP dispatched 2,393 metric tons of food from the La Guaira Temporary Prepositioning Area (TPA) 
to support meal preparation in transitional camps and ensure the continuity of food assistance 
operations. 
 
 Nutrition 
 UNICEF conducted nutrition activities in transitional camps through MUAC nutritional screening, 
micronutrient supplementation, and Infant and Young Child Feeding in Emergencies (IYCF- E)
OCHA | 6 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
counselling, prioritizing young children, pregnant women and breastfeeding mothers in Polideportivo 
Vargas, Estadio César Nieves and Playa Grande. 
 
 Protection (including Children and Gender-Based Violence) 
 UNHCR continued providing legal counselling, psychosocial support, documentation assistance and 
referrals to specialized services in the Polideportivo Vargas, Estadio César Nieves and Playa Grande 
transitional camps. During the reporting period, 20 people participated in protection information 
sessions in Polideportivo Vargas, while an additional 20 people received psychosocial support, legal 
guidance or referrals to specialized services across the three camps. 
 UNICEF continued child protection activities in transitional camps in La Guaira, reaching 93 children 
and adolescents through safe spaces, recreational activities and awareness -raising messages on 
child sexual abuse prevention, positive parenting and respectful caregiving. 
 UNFPA implemented gender-based violence (GBV) prevention and response activities, reaching 90 
people through community awareness sessions in Polideportivo Vargas, Estadio César Nieves and 
Playa Grande. In addition, UNFPA provided psychosocial support and c ontinued delivering sexual 
and reproductive health services for women and adolescents. 
Shelter and Non-Food Items 
 IOM and its partners continue strengthening accommodation conditions through the distribution of 
essential items and improvements to camp infrastructure. In Polideportivo Vargas, the distribution of 
421 kitchen sets and buckets to accommodated families was completed. 
 In Campo de Golf (Tanaguarena) and Mare Abajo II camps, efforts to improve accommodation 
conditions continue, including tent installation, drainage improvements, expansion of community 
services and the upgrading of spaces for humanitarian service delivery and assistance to affected 
populations. 
 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH)  
 Humanitarian organizations continued strengthening water, sanitation and hygiene services in 
transitional camps in La Guaira. In Polideportivo Vargas, Estadio César Nieves and Playa Grande, 
activities included maintenance of WASH facilities, solid waste management, provision of safe water 
and hygiene promotion for camp residents and host communities. 
 In Campo de Golf (Tanaguarena), IOM, UNICEF, Action Against Hunger, All Hands and Hearts and 
other partners conducted joint assessments to expand WASH infrastructure, including toilets, 
showers, handwashing stations and water storage facilities. 
 In Mare Abajo II, the installation of basic WASH infrastructure and safe water systems continued 
with the participation of IOM, UNICEF, MSF and other humanitarian actors. 
Humanitarian financing and contributions  
 The United Nations humanitarian chief, Tom Fletcher, announced an additional appeal under the 
Humanitarian Response Plan for Venezuela. The appeal outlines the multisectoral needs of 1.3 
million people over the next six months. To reach those in need, US$298  million is required, in 
addition to the US$632 million requested at the beginning of the year. 
 The Government of Japan allocated US$3.5 million to support the earthquake response. The funding 
will provide humanitarian assistance in key sectors, including food security, health care, shelter and 
non-food items, through WFP, the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 
(IFRC) and IOM. 
 The Royal Netherlands Navy delivered an additional shipment of humanitarian assistance and 
emergency relief supplies to La Guaira as part of a sustained support mechanism from Curaçao that 
has already facilitated five consecutive missions. A new vessel wil l be deployed to ensure the 
continuity of these operations and support the delivery of assistance to affected areas. 
 As part of the support provided by UNDAC, the team includes a private sector coordination specialist 
to strengthen business engagement in response and recovery efforts. A private sector contributions 
tracker for the Venezuela earthquake response is available at https://ven-
OCHA | 7 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
eq.connectingbusiness.org, together with a briefing note for the private sector outlining opportunities 
for engagement. Focal point: sanchez21@un.org.  
 The Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) allocated US$15 million to support a multisectoral 
response, alongside the activation of the Venezuela Humanitarian Fund (VHF). Norway contributed 
to support the response through CERF. 
 The United States  announced a US$100 million contribution to the VHF, in addition to a further 
US$100 million in bilateral funding for response operations implemented by IOM, WFP, UNICEF, 
International Medical Corps, Catholic Relief Services, Samaritan’s Purse, Proyecto Esperanza and 
the Red Cross. 
 Germany and the Republic of Korea contributed US$5 million and US$1.25 million, respectively, to 
the VHF to support humanitarian action in the country. Other Member States and donors have 
expressed their intention to support the response through the Fund.  
 IOM launched a US$98 million appeal to assist 850,000 people and support 140 entities over 
the next six months. PAHO/WHO launched an emergency appeal for nearly US$24 million to 
support health response and early recovery activities over the next six months and released US$1.5 
million from the Contingency Fund for Emergencies.  WFP launched an initial appeal for US$50 
million to scale up food assistance and support emergency logistics and communications activities. 
UNHCR requires US$14.8 million to support up to 30,000 affected people over the next six months. 
 The European Union allocated €5 million to support the emergency response, in addition to the €52 
million already allocated this year for humanitarian operations in the country. 
 Australia announced a US$2 million contribution to support the provision of food, shelter, healthcare 
and access to safe water through IFRC and WFP. 
 Switzerland announced a contribution of CHF 2.5 million to support the response. 
 Sweden allocated SEK 25 million to support the humanitarian response through food assistance, 
water, temporary shelter, protection and family reunification programmes implemented by WFP, 
UNHCR and Save the Children. 
 Denmark announced an additional contribution of DKK 11 million to support the humanitarian 
response, including DKK 10 million through UNHCR and DKK 1 million through DanChurchAid and 
the Danish Red Cross. 
 The Disasters Emergency Committee (DEC) announced an initial allocation of £7.5 million for the 
earthquake response in Venezuela, including £2 million contributed by the United Kingdom 
Government through UK Aid Match. The funds will be implemented by DEC member agencies and 
their local partners to support the humanitarian response. 
 OCHA continues to coordinate with donors and partners to ensure rapid, strategic and needs-based 
allocation of resources. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact information 
For more information, please contact the OCHA Venezuela Office: 
 
Vanessa May – Head of Office a.i. – mayv@un.org  
Alfonso Zabaleta – Humanitarian Affairs Officer – alfonso.zabaleta@un.org  
Jennifer Moreno – Public Information Officer – moreno7@un.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Support the humanitarian response to address the earthquake in Venezuela 
Make your donation safely and quickly now: 
https://crisisrelief.un.org/en/donate-venezuela-crisis