US congressman Dan Goldman has been defeated in a New York primary election, capping a clean sweep for candidates backed by New York's democratic socialist Mayor Zohran Mamdani as he seeks to tilt the Democratic Party to the left.
Goldman was beaten by progressive challenger Brad Lander in New York's 10th congressional district in a contest that laid bare the party's divisions over the Israel-Gaza war.
Lander has accused Israel of genocide in Gaza. Goldman, a two-term incumbent, was backed by pro-Israel groups.
Two other candidates, both democratic socialists endorsed by Mamdani, won their primary races on Tuesday, in a boost for the party's left wing in America's largest city.
Assemblywoman Claire Valdez unseated Brooklyn Borough President Antonio Reynoso in the 7th district.
Darializa Avila Chevalier, a doctoral student who has joined pro-Palestinian protests at Columbia University, won her race in New York's 13th district. 
She toppled Adriano Espaillat, who had held the district for five terms and is chair of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus, a body that advocates for legislation and resources for Hispanic Americans.
Lander, who was also endorsed by Vermont's democratic socialist Senator Bernie Sanders, easily beat Goldman by 65.7% to 34.1%, with most votes counted.
In a post on X after the results, he said his victory showed that the people of his district covering Lower Manhattan and part of Brooklyn "want leadership ready to fight, not fold, against authoritarianism".
The former New York City comptroller's bid against Goldman, who was first elected to Congress in 2022, was seen as a test of Mamdani's political influence.
Goldman said he had called Lander to congratulate him, according to the BBC's US news partner CBS.
"Tonight, the voters of 10th District have spoken. While this is not the outcome I worked so hard for, I respect their decision," Goldman said.
US President Donald Trump called Goldman "weak and pathetic" in the aftermath of the race, adding that the congressman "just lost, BIG!"