Good morning. You're reading the Up First newsletter. 
Subscribe
 here to get it delivered to your inbox, and 
listen
 to the Up First podcast for all the news you need to start your day.
 
Today's top stories
 
The U.S. conducted strikes on Iran last night after an American helicopter was downed 
near the Strait of Hormuz on Monday. President Trump blamed Iran for the incident. Starting at 5 p.m., the U.S. strikes targeted "Iranian air defense, ground control stations, and surveillance radar sites near the Strait of Hormuz," the U.S. Central Command said. CENTCOM described the action as a "
proportional response to unjustified Iranian aggression
," and added that U.S. forces remain vigilant and ready to defend against any further Iranian threats. Trump said it was necessary to retaliate against Iran to uphold U.S. credibility. Iranian officials say they did not target the U.S. helicopter and suggested it went down in an accident. The troops on the downed helicopter were unharmed.
 









                President Trump speaks to the press before boarding Air Force One prior to departure from John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York.
                

                    
                    Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images
                    
                


hide caption






toggle caption





        
        Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images
        
    






🎧
 NPR correspondents in the region report that air raid sirens sounded across
 Kuwait, Bahrain and Jordan overnight as Iranian missiles targeted U.S. military bases. The Iranian foreign minister issued a statement saying that attacks or 
threats would not go unanswered
. NPR's Franco Ordoñez says there is a real danger of Iranian retaliation against the strikes, which could spark a cycle of responses and counter-responses, each time growing more dangerous. The U.S. strikes complicate Trump's negotiations with Iran, especially if tensions can't be contained. Trump said yesterday that the U.S and Iran were just days away from a deal. After weeks of hearing the same thing, Americans are having a harder time buying into his messages on the conflict as gas prices and electricity costs continue to rise, Ordoñez says.


Maine, Nevada, North Dakota and South Carolina held their primaries yesterday, 
determining their candidates for several key matchups for the November general elections. In Maine, 
voters chose Democrat Graham Platner
 to challenge long-time Republican Sen. Susan Collins for the state's U.S. Senate seat. Here are 
Maine's primary election results
.
 
🎧
 Democrats are focused on gaining control of the Senate this November,
 and defeating Collins would be crucial in accomplishing that goal, NPR's Saige Miller says. While Collins isn't a Trump loyalist, her 
affiliation with the Republican Party could be detrimental
 because of Trump's unpopularity both nationally and within her state. Platner believes his platform and personal transformation can resonate with voters, but he has faced many questions since launching his campaign in August. Recently, 
The New York Times
 reported that former romantic partners called Platner toxic and disrespectful to women. In the past, Platner's history may have led him to withdraw from the race. But Miller says the current political landscape is different, and many politicians have been able to weather scandals these days.
➡️ 
In Nevada, Democratic voters have selected two-time state Attorney General Aaron Ford 
as their party's nominee to 
face off against incumbent Republican Gov. Joe Lombardo
. See more results from Nevada's 
primary here
.
➡️
 In South Carolina, Lt. Gov. Pamela Evette and Attorney General Alan Wilson are headed
 into a 
gubernatorial primary runoff in two weeks
 to determine the Republican candidate, after neither secured a majority. Trump backed Evette in the race. Here are the 
results from South Carolina's primary
.
➡️
 Here are North Dakota's
 
primary election results
.
➡️ 
For a look at upcoming
 state primaries, special elections and the general election, check out 
NPR's 2026 election calendar
.


The House narrowly voted yesterday to allocate roughly $70 billion to the Department of Homeland Security 
for Immigration and Customs Enforcement and Border Patrol, 
concluding a 115-day standoff
 over immigration policy. The spending measure includes $38 billion for ICE, about 3.5 times the previous annual budget approved by Congress. The bill now heads to President Trump's desk and is set to fully finance these operations for the remainder of his term, adding to the tens of billions already approved last year.
 
🎧 
The historic investment in Trump's immigration agenda ensures there will be more resources
 to enhance the administration's efforts to increase arrest and deportation rates, NPR's Ximena Bustillo says. The measure has no provisions for how much must be spent within a certain timeframe. Immigration advocates warn that regular appropriations bills often include provisions that would require DHS to report to Congress or the public on spending, program updates and demographics of those detained. This measure 
doesn't have any of those requirements
. Democrats were unable to secure a mandate for immigration officers to wear body cameras, provisions on warrants needed to enter homes or limitations on face coverings.
➡️ 
ICE denies having a protester database. But in a previously unpublicized letter
 to Congress, recently-departed acting ICE director Todd Lyons said the agency collects data on people 
suspected of potentially unlawful activity
, which could include protesters. NPR is the first news organization to review the letter, which is dated April 21.
 
Bill Gates is set to appear before members of Congress today to answer questions about 
his relationship with the late convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein, as part of the House Oversight Committee's investigation. Gates has 
denied any knowledge of Epstein's crimes
. The closed-door interview will not be recorded, but the Republican-led committee plans to release a transcript in the days afterward, similar to what it did after former Attorney General Pam Bondi testified. The Microsoft co-founder is among many influential figures mentioned in Justice Department documents about the disgraced financier. Appearing in the files does not necessarily imply criminal wrongdoing.


Today's listen
 










The Last Ship
 is the first musical to be staged at New York's Metropolitan Opera. It draws upon Sting's childhood growing up in the shadow of a shipyard.
                

                    
                    Mark Senior
                    
                


hide caption






toggle caption





        
        Mark Senior
        
    






This week, 
The Last Ship
 becomes the first musical to be staged at New York's Metropolitan Opera. The show is inspired by rock star Sting's childhood spent in the shadow of a shipyard. When it first opened on Broadway in 2014, the musical struggled at the box office and received sharp reviews. In the renewed version, Sting takes on the lead role of foreman Jackie White, delivering his now raspy voice. He is joined on stage by his frequent collaborator, reggae star Shaggy. Sting says he first had the idea for this show in 1990, when he returned to his community of Wallsend, England, and found that the shipyard was closing down just as his parents were dying. Much of the music and lyrics are drawn from Sting's 1991 album 
The Soul Cages
, and weave elements of his family's story into ballads, Celtic folk music and classical recordings that his mother collected. Listen to 
snippets of the musical
 and 
read more about Sting's inspiration
 for the story.
 
Living better
 









                A study in the journal 
Science
 found that people who work remotely had more depression, anxiety and visits to mental health professionals than those who work in jobs that can't be done remotely.
                

                    
                    Lea Suzuki/The San Francisco Chronicle via Getty Images
                    
                


hide caption






toggle caption





        
        Lea Suzuki/The San Francisco Chronicle via Getty Images
        
    






Living Better is a 
special series
 about what it takes to stay healthy in America.
 
Remote work has increasingly become more popular since the COVID-19 pandemic. But it could be taking a toll on people's mental health. A new study indicates work-from-home practices have made workers more socially isolated, anxious and depressed compared to those who work in-person in offices and other settings. Researchers found that people in remote roles are spending more hours alone during workdays and have increased their visits to mental healthcare providers. Here's a 
look at what experts say about the findings
:
 
💻 Remote workers spent 58% more hours alone than those in non-remote jobs. These workers also saw a 72% increase in the likelihood of spending their entire day without any human contact.
💻 The rise in symptoms of emotional distress has been found to be worse for remote workers who live alone.
💻 As organizations begin to bring employees back to the office, employers should ensure that those who come in have other co-workers present, says Nicholas Epley, a professor of behavioral science at the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business, who wasn't involved in the study.


3 things to know before you go
 









                NASA introduced the four astronauts scheduled to fly on next year's Artemis III mission. (From left to right) NASA commander Randy Bresnik, European Space Agency pilot Luca Parmitano, NASA mission specialist Frank Rubio, and NASA mission specialist Andre Douglas at a press conference announcing the crew at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, on Tuesday.
                

                    
                    Ronaldo Schemidt/AFP via Getty Images
                    
                


hide caption






toggle caption





        
        Ronaldo Schemidt/AFP via Getty Images
        
    






NASA yesterday 
named four astronauts
 who are scheduled to fly on the Artemis III mission as early as next year. This mission is a crucial test flight to prepare for a human landing on the lunar surface.
A trust fund that helps pay Social Security benefits is 
expected to run out of money
 in 2032, three months earlier than what was predicted last year.
After years of declines, 
new federal test scores show
 younger students are making gains in reading and math.
 
This newsletter was edited by 
Suzanne Nuyen
.