Good morning.
The US and Iran have announced 
a framework peace deal
, expected to be signed later this week, that would bring their 15-week conflict to a tentative end, offering hope of relief for the Middle East and the world economy.
Iran said war and military operations on all fronts, including in Lebanon, would end permanently from Monday night. Donald Trump announced the opening of the strait of Hormuz as well as the removal of the US naval blockade, but did not mention Lebanon.




What do we know about the deal? 
Leaked drafts suggest
 an immediate 60-day period of intensive technical talks, during which the most contentious issues, including Iran’s nuclear program, will be discussed. Iran’s deputy foreign minister said negotiators would seek to reach a broader agreement including sanctions relief.




What has been the reaction in Iran?
 The Guardian’s diplomatic editor, Patrick Wintour, reports 
anger among the country’s hardliners
, who say the proposed deal does not guarantee an end to sanctions, compensation or control of the strait of Hormuz.




And in Israel? 
Israel’s defense minister has said its forces “will remain in the security zones in Lebanon, Syria and Gaza – indefinitely – to defend the border and Israeli communities against jihadist elements”. Israel was frozen out of talks, despite having jointly launched the assault on Iran with the US.


JD Vance says he will discuss 2028 presidential run after midterm elections
JD Vance: ‘The way that I make decisions is that I try not to make them until I absolutely must.’
 Photograph: Getty Images
JD Vance, who is seen as a top contender for the Republican nomination for president – with the US secretary of state, Marco Rubio, touted as a potential running mate – gave insight into 
his deliberations
 on whether to run during an interview with CBS on Sunday.
“People sort of assume that I’m sitting around, figuring out whether I’m gonna run,” the vice-president said. “The way that I make decisions is that I try not to make them until I absolutely must.”




Will he have Trump’s blessing?
 “I have no doubt that the president of the US is going to be very supportive of anything that I ultimately decide to do,” Vance said. “I never bring it up. But sure, the president brings it up a lot, sometimes publicly, sometimes privately. You know, the president’s a political animal. He loves this stuff. He’s very fascinated by it.”


Trump’s White House UFC fights marred by Michelle Obama smear
One UFC fighter repeated one of the oldest and most persistent smears directed at the former first lady Michelle Obama.
 Photograph: Jim Watson/AFP/Getty Images
Trump celebrated his 80th birthday and the forthcoming 250th anniversary of US independence by staging the first professional sporting event in White House history. One fighter, Josh Hokit, delivered a rambling post-fight interview in which he veered from praise for the president to religion before 
concluding with the false conspiracy claim
 that “Michelle Obama is a man”.




What did protesters say about the cage fight?
 Thousands of fight fans had to 
pass protesters
 to get to the White House. Susan Douglas, an organizer with Third Act Virginia, a progressive pro-democracy grassroots organization, said: “This reeks of corruption. It’s for Trump’s birthday and has nothing to do with the founding of our country.”


In other news …
The Republican senator Mitch McConnell has been admitted to hospital.
 Photograph: Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images




Mitch ⁠McConnell was 
admitted ​to ‌
hospital
 ‌on Sunday morning.
 A spokesperson said the US senator ⁠from Kentucky was receiving “excellent care”.




A Russian missile and drone attack on Kyiv has 
badly damaged the 
Dormition Cathedral
 in the Pechersk Lavra monastery complex, a Unesco world heritage site. Nine people were killed across Ukraine including four in Kyiv.




Access to social media 
is to be 
banned in the UK
 for 
under-16s
, a policy criticised by the US administration. Dan Milmo and Aisha Down explain 
why Keir Starmer is following Australia’s move
.




The son of Norway’s crown princess has been 
convicted of rape
 and sentenced to four years in prison.




A judge has dismissed
 a suit by a fired Yosemite ranger who hung a trans pride flag in park.
 They have been ordered to follow the process set out by the Civil Service Reform Act.


Stat of the day: Attacks on education, pupils and staff around the world up by 40%, says study
Eight-year-old Palestinian Sidra al-Bardini lost her left arm as a result of an Israeli attack on a school sheltering displaced people in Gaza.
 Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images
Attacks on education globally have 
surged by 40%
 with more than 8,556 recorded incidents and 10,600 students and staff killed, injured, abducted, arrested or otherwise harmed in 2024 and 2025. Attacks were reported in 83 countries, with the highest incidences recorded in Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Haiti, Palestine and Ukraine.
Building power: Your questions about the US supreme court’s voting rights decision answered
The Guardian reporters Fabiola Cineas and Adria Walker held a Reddit Q&A about Louisiana v Callais supreme court ruling.
 Illustration: Guardian Design
The supreme court’s decision in Louisiana v Callais struck a massive blow to the Voting Rights Act, eliminating a key provision that gave minority voters representation in Congress. The Guardian reporters Fabiola Cineas and Adria Walker held a Reddit Q&A about it, and 
here’s a rundown
.
Don’t miss this: Residents join national push to stop Georgia datacenter that threatens local rivers
There has been a growing opposition among residents to planned datacenters across the country.
 Photograph: Arizona Daily Star/Getty Images
As part of a growing groundswell of grassroots citizens’ actions against datacenters, Coweta county could become only the third county in Georgia history to stage a referendum 
allowing residents to challenge a county policy or decision
 – in this case, the approval for Project Sail, a datacenter covering more than 800 acres.
… or this: The quest to save Shackleton’s Endurance
A photograph from Shackleton’s expedition. His ship, the Endurance, was discovered in 2022.
 Photograph: George Rinhart/Corbis/Getty Images
The discovery of the wreck of Ernest Shackleton’s Endurance in 2022 was in part because no creatures have been known to have adapted to eat wood in the Antarctic. But now conservationists fear the rapidly changing climate, and the potential for exploration vessels to access the ship, may pose a threat. 
Karen McVeigh reports for our Seascape series
.
Climate check: Amoc collapse could change Europe’s climate 10x faster than expected
Fjallsárlón glacier lagoon, Iceland. The Amoc is projected to weaken enough to radically change the weather and cause sea level rise.
 Photograph: Marco Bottigelli/Getty Images
The Atlantic meridional overturning circulation is a vast system of ocean current that moves heat from the south to north in the Atlantic. Because of the climate crisis, the Amoc is projected to weaken enough to radically change the weather and cause sea level rise in Europe. Thanks to US budget cuts, 
monitoring, understanding and forecasting the Amoc is at risk
.
Last Thing: Ecstasy and chaos grip New York City after Knicks win long-sought NBA title
Knicks fans cheer after their team won their first NBA championships title since 1973.
 Photograph: Julius Constantine Motal/The Guardian
Euphoric fans flooded midtown Manhattan on Saturday night to celebrate the New York Knicks’ first championship in 53 years. Here are 
the best pictures
, while Aaron Timms puts it into context, saying after such a long wait, 
the franchise finally got its moment
.
Sign up
Sign up for the US morning briefing
First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, 
subscribe now
.
Get in touch
If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email 
newsletters@theguardian.com