Insecurity continues to deteriorate in Tillabéry, Diffa, Tahoua, and Dosso regions 
Key Messages 
This report provides an update to the February to September 2026 Food Security Outlook and March 2026 Key 
Message Update. The analysis is based on information available as of April 22, 2026. 
Niger - Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026 
Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes will likely persist in the regions 
of Tillabéry and Diffa, as well as in the northwestern part of 
Tahoua Region, from April through September 2026. Conflict 
continues to cause population displacement and disrupt 
livelihoods and markets. Prices exceeding the purchasing 
capacity of displaced populations and poor host households are 
resulting in limited market access, and households are reducing 
meals to one or two per day due to lack of food stocks. The 
number of households in Crisis (IPC Phase 3) is expected to 
increase from June to September 2026, and around 5 percent 
could deteriorate into Emergency (IPC Phase 4) under the 
combined effects of conflict and flooding. 
Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes are expected in 
agricultural, agropastoral, and pastoral areas not affected 
by conflict from May through September 2026. Poor 
households’ purchasing power is only sufficient to cover food 
expenditures, while food stocks are being depleted and 
households increasingly depend on markets characterized by 
very high food prices. Small groups of poor households with 
more severe food deficits are expected to deteriorate into Crisis 
(IPC Phase 3) outcomes between June and September. Their 
limited purchasing power will only allow them to obtain very 
small quantities of food. 
The medium-term impacts of the conflict in the Middle East, 
driven by rising maritime freight costs and higher global oil 
prices, are expected to increase the prices of imported 
products and fertilizers. However, in the short term, market 
prices have not yet been disrupted by the conflict. Niger’s status 
as an oil-producing country and the diversity of supply sources 
for imported goods are helping to delay the transmission of 
ongoing disruptions to domestic markets for manufactured 
products. 
The security situation is deteriorating due to the increase 
and frequency of security incidents, leading to population 
displacement and disruptions to markets and livelihoods. The 
main insecurity hotspots Tillabéry, Diffa, northwestern Tahoua, 
and Dosso. 
FEWS NET is a United States Government-funded activity. The content of this report does not
necessarily reflect the view of the United States Government.
FEWS NET Niger
niger@fews.net
fews.net/west-africa/niger
Current anomalies in food security conditions as of April 2026 
Updates to key assumptions about atypical food security conditions through September 2026 
Most of the assumptions that underpinned FEWS NET’s analysis of the most likely scenario for the Niger Food 
Security Outlook from February to September 2026 remain valid; however, the following updates have been made 
to incorporate new evidence: 
Figure 1 
Number of security incidents and 
fatalities, January 2025 – March 2026 
Source: ACLED 
The security situation in Niger continues to deteriorate, 
with increasing attacks by armed terrorist groups in the 
regions of Tillabéry, Diffa, Tahoua, and Dosso. According to 
ACLED data, security incidents increased by 29 percent during 
the January-March 2026 period compared to the same period 
in 2025, with the largest increases recorded in Tahoua, Diffa, 
and Dosso (Figure 1). The analysis shows that terrorist attacks 
in 2026 caused an average of two fatalities per attack but were 
more deadly in the regions of Tahoua and Tillabéry, where the 
average reached three and four fatalities per attack, 
respectively. 
Terrorist attacks continue to trigger forced population 
displacement. According to UN High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNHCR) data, as of March 31, 2026, the country 
had 1,032,114 forcibly displaced people, including 548,386 
internally displaced persons (IDPs), compared with 459,000 
during the same period in 2025, representing an increase of 19 percent. 
According to the final results of the 2025/26 agricultural season from the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock, agricultural production declined by 10.7 percent compared with 2024/25, but remained 
similar to the five-year average. The largest declines were observed in the regions of Agadez, Diffa, Tahoua, 
and Tillabéry, where losses in cultivated area and production were recorded due to conflict and flooding. In 
pastoral areas, the fodder balance indicates a decline of more than 23 percent compared to last year due to 
rainfall deficits. This fodder deficit, combined with limited access to some grazing areas, is leading to an early 
onset of the lean season in pastoral zones beginning in April 2026. 
Markets are generally functioning normally overall, although major disruptions remain concentrated in 
markets located in conflict zones. Food supplies are considered sufficient due to local supplies from surplus-
producing farmers and traders, as well as government subsidized sales (82,000 metric tons of millet, sorghum, 
and maize). These subsidized sales, initiated in March 2026 by the Niger Food Products Office (OPVN), are 
expected to reach 820,000 households by the end of June 2026, or 1,435,000 people, in four phases. Demand is 
evolving steadily but remains lower than last year and below normal seasonal trends due to carryover stocks. 
Prices are generally lower than both last year’s levels and the five-year average. 
The continued influx of displaced people has led to an increase in labor supply, intensified competition, 
and below-average incomes. Seasonal income-generating activities for poor and displaced households – such 
as agricultural labor for the maintenance and harvesting of off-season crops, as well as land preparation for the 
upcoming rainy season – are being further constrained by the reduction in cultivated areas caused by 
insecurity. 
Food supply on markets will remain insufficient in conflict-affected areas. In addition to the agricultural 
production deficit, which limits local supply, insecurity continues to disrupt roads and trade flows used to supply 
markets. However, stocks from the 2025/26 harvest, combined with carryover stocks and the continued 
government ban on cereal exports, are expected to ensure food availability countrywide, particularly in areas 
unaffected by conflict.  
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 2
Projected acute food insecurity outcomes through September 2026 
Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes are expected to persist in the regions of Tillabéry, Diffa, and northwestern 
Tahoua through September 2026. In these areas, poor households will deplete food stocks following very low 
agricultural production due to the combined effects of conflict and flooding. They will depend entirely on market 
purchases. Subsidized cereal sales generally contribute to stabilizing food prices in markets, but insecurity limits the 
geographic coverage of these operations. As a result, food price increases are expected to persist and worsen further 
due to the impacts of the conflict in the Middle East on transport costs and imported food products. These price 
increases are expected to reach their seasonal peak during this period, significantly restricting the purchasing power 
of poor and displaced households to very small quantities of food, insufficient to cover half of the required 2,100 
kilocalories per person per day. Between June and September 2026, Emergency (IPC Phase 4) outcomes are expected 
among a small proportion of poor displaced households (less than 5 percent) facing major livelihood disruptions due 
to theft and looting by armed terrorist groups and lacking income-earning opportunities in host areas. 
Agricultural, agropastoral, and pastoral areas unaffected by conflict are expected to face Stressed (IPC Phase 
2) outcomes from April through September 2026, with a small proportion of households in Crisis (IPC Phase 3) 
from June through September 2026. Poor households in these areas will deplete food stocks from own production 
and will rely on markets in a context of high prices and constrained purchasing power. However, substitution for 
cheaper food products will allow households to meet basic food needs. Food prices are expected to follow a 
sustained upward trend due to the effects of the lean season, progressively compounded by the impacts of the 
conflict in the Middle East, which are affecting fuel and imported food prices and transport costs. These disruptions 
will reduce the purchasing power of poor households in these areas from June through September 2026, limiting 
their expenditures primarily to food, while remaining insufficient to cover non-food needs. Small proportions of these 
poor households (around 5 percent) will lack sufficient food quantities, forcing households to reduce the number of 
meals or portion sizes, and causing gradual deterioration into Crisis (IPC Phase 3). 
Annex 1: Updates to key sources of evidence used in this analysis 
Many of the key sources of evidence utilized for FEWS NET’s February to September 2026 Food Security Outlook 
remain the same; however, new and additional sources of evidence are listed below. 
Poor households are expected to have low incomes due to the migration of populations from areas 
affected by agricultural deficits and increased competition in labor supply resulting from displacement 
from conflict areas. Income-earning opportunities from seasonal agricultural labor will be insufficient relative 
to labor supply because displaced persons are competing alongside poor host households for the same 
opportunities.  
Rainfall during the 2026/27 agricultural season is expected to be average to above average across 
Sahelian countries, according to the latest weather forecast updates. However, with these anticipated heavy 
rains, flood risks are also expected to remain high across the different hydrological basins. 
The conflict in the Middle East, with rising fuel and transport prices, is expected to increase fertilizer 
prices. This will likely reduce fertilizer use and decrease the cultivated area dedicated to fertilizer-intensive 
crops. These reductions in cultivated areas are expected to lower agricultural production, reduce demand for 
agricultural labor, and depress seasonal wages for poor households. 
The impacts of the ongoing conflict in the Middle East on global energy markets could lead food prices in 
Niger to rise above current projections, especially if maritime trade disruptions and higher fuel prices persist. 
In a context of heavy dependence on imports through already constrained (Cotonou) and costly (Lomé) trade 
corridors, any increase in transport costs is likely to be quickly passed on to food prices. When combined with 
the lean season, during which households become increasingly market dependent, these factors could further 
intensify inflationary pressures. 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 3
Final results of the 2025/26 
agricultural season 
Ministry of 
Agriculture and 
Livestock 
Quantitative Total agricultural production compared to 
the previous year 
Rate of coverage of cereal requirements 
Food assistance Ministry of Trade/
government 
Quantitative Access to food assistance and its impact on 
meeting consumption needs 
Evidence  Source Data 
format 
Food security element of analysis 
Annex 2: Seasonal calendar 
Recommended citation: FEWS NET. Niger Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026: Insecurity continues to 
deteriorate in Tillabéry, Diffa, Tahoua, and Dosso regions, 2026. 
Food Security Outlook Update 
This Food Security Outlook Update provides an analysis of current acute food insecurity conditions and any changes to FEWS NET's latest projection of acute food insecurity outcomes 
in the specified geography over the next six months. Learn more here. 
Evidence  Source 
Data 
format Food security element of analysis 
Source: FEWS NET 
* FEWS NET classification is IPC-compatible with limited exceptions. IPC-compatible analysis follows key IPC protocols but does not necessarily reflect the consensus of national food security 
partners. As of IPC 3.0, the IPC no longer assesses the impact of food assistance on classification and thus no longer maps the (!). However, FEWS NET continues to produce food security 
maps inclusive of the (!) as well as maps compatible with IPC 3.0/3.1, which include the mapping of food security assistance bags. In rare cases, FEWS NET classification is IPC-aligned but 
not IPC-compatible. IPC-aligned analysis is evidence-based but some types of evidence required for IPC-compatibility were not available. 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 4