Donald Trump has claimed he could approve an Iran peace deal on Friday that contains major concessions from Tehran, including the opening of the strait of Hormuz and the elimination of the country’s nuclear programme. However, top Iranian officials signalled a final agreement had not been reached.
The two versions indicate Trump may once again be practising his “art of the deal” as he seeks to talk his way out of a war that has disrupted global energy supplies and 
rocked the world economy
.
Describing the terms of the purported deal on his Truth Social platform, the US president said 
Iran
 “must agree that they will never have a Nuclear Weapon or Bomb”, open the strait of Hormuz for all traffic without tolls, eliminate mines in the waterway and allow the US to unearth and destroy highly enriched uranium from a secure nuclear site in Iran. He also said the deal would preclude the transfer of frozen assets to Iran.
Trump also said he would lift the US naval blockade against Iran, although it was not immediately clear whether that would be subject to the agreement being confirmed.
“I will be meeting now, in the Situation Room, to make a final determination,” he wrote.
The virtual wishlist of US demands in the negotiations was presented as a completed deal and would indicate that Iran had capitulated on key positions, including its right to exact tolls from ships traversing the strait of Hormuz, the release of the frozen assets and an insistence on the country’s right to maintain its nuclear programme.
But Iranian officials signaled defiance after Trump’s announcement, and those close to the government denied that a deal has been reached. The semi-official Tasnim news agency reported on Friday that no final understanding had been reached between Iran and the US and that Trump’s post was “in line with his usual pattern of making unilateral and egotistical statements”.
The foreign ministry spokesperson Esmaeil Baqaei told state media: “Regarding the understanding, as I said while speaking to you, exchanges of messages are continuing, but no final agreement has been reached yet.”
Tasnim reported that there had been no discussion about the nuclear issue, and that Trump’s reports of lifting the US’s own blockade in the strait of Hormuz should be met with “scepticism”.
Iran’s Fars news agency said Trump had published a “mixture of truth and lies” about the terms of an agreement, which did not include provisions for the opening of the strait of Hormuz without fees, or the destruction of Iran’s nuclear material.
Can Trump’s negotiation playbook solve the Iran war? – video
On Friday, Iran’s top negotiator, Mohammad-Bagher Ghalibaf, wrote that Iran had “no trust in guarantees or words – only actions are the measure”.
Ghalibaf also sent out a defiant message that Iran was ready for another round of fighting if talks to extend the ceasefire and end the war failed.
“We seize concessions not through dialogue, but with missiles; in negotiations, we merely make them understand,” he wrote. “The winner of any agreement is the one who is better prepared for war from the day after.”
The US vice-president, JD Vance, hinted on Thursday night that an agreement was close, but Trump was reported to need more time to decide whether to back a negotiated agreement that would defer many of the difficult issues, including the fate of Iran’s remaining stockpile of nuclear materials, into subsequent negotiations.
Senior Iranian officials repeated there was no plan to allow the export of its uranium, but observers have suggested that does not rule out downblended uranium that is further from weapons grade.
Trump may need time not just to reflect, but to persuade a reluctant Benjamin Netanyahu to accept the need for a ceasefire in Lebanon as part of the agreement.
The Israeli prime minister has been using the past few days 
to step up attacks on Hezbollah positions throughout Lebanon
, including in the capital, Beirut.
Netanyahu did not immediately comment on the Iran deal, saying: “Our forces have crossed the Litani and advanced into strategic areas. We are operating in Beirut, in the Bekaa Valley, and across the entire front, and we are directly targeting Hezbollah.”
Baghaei, has said the “silence and the indifference of international institutions” will provoke 
Israel
 to “further embitterment”.
He also described the US as “an accomplice and partner in all of Israel’s crimes” in Lebanon, the Palestinian territories and the entire region.
Ebrahim Rezaei, the spokesperson for the Iranian parliament’s national security and foreign policy commission, suggested Iran was in no mood to back down on its plans to change the management of the strait of Hormuz.
He claimed Iran’s management of the waterway had been recognised worldwide, which is “why countries obtain permission, pay the costs, and, with the guidance of the IRGC Navy, pass their vessels through. The only one who hasn’t believed it, or doesn’t want to believe it, is Trump; every now and then he sends his army to open the strait, they come and get beaten and go back.”
In a televised interview, Rezaei questioned whether it was necessary for Iran in the agreement to renounce any desire to acquire nuclear weapons. “Why should we commit to America that we will not build a nuclear weapon?” he said. “This matter is none of America’s business.”
At the same time, Ebrahim Azizi, the chair of the parliament’s national security and foreign policy commission, denied reports about the possible transfer of Iran’s enriched uranium stockpiles to a third country or mediator, saying the Islamic Republic has no intention of handing over or transferring these materials.
Earlier, the Iranian president, Mahmoud Pezeshkian, adopted a more conciliatory tone, thanking Pakistani mediators for their effectiveness toward reaching an agreement. He spoke by phone with the Pakistani prime minister, Shahbaz Sharif, as Pakistan’s foreign minister, Mohammad Ishaq Dar met with the US secretary of state, Marco Rubio, in Washington.