United Nations 
 
Nations Unies 
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs  
 
The mission of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) is to coordinate the global emergency response 
to save lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. We advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for all. 
www.unocha.org 
 
 KILLING OF CIVILIANS SHOULD NEVER BE NORMALIZED IN WAR 
HUMANITARIAN COORDINATOR FOR UKRAINE, MATTHIAS SCHMALE, CONDEMNS 
ONE OF THE LARGEST RUSSIAN ATTACKS ON KYIV CITY DURING THE WAR 
Last night, many of Kyiv's three million residents and thousands more across the region spent up 
to 11 hours in shelters or taking cover at home to the terrifying sounds of war. 
Following one of the largest-scale attacks by the Russian Armed Forces since the full-scale 
invasion, people in Ukraine’s capital emerged from a sleepless night to devastating news: at least 
13 residents were killed, and nearly 90, including several children, were wounded. Among the 
casualties are several health workers and ambulance drivers injured by a strike that hit an 
ambulance station and damaged several vehicles. 
Search and rescue operations are ongoing to save people trapped beneath the rubble of collapsed 
residential buildings, including a 15-year-old girl and her family. Multiple homes, a hotel, a 
market and other civilian facilities were destroyed or damaged in nearly every part of the capital. 
The loss and fear caused by this and every other attack intensify the psychological trauma 
countless people have to bear. The longer the war goes on, the deeper these invisible scars 
become. These latest attacks are part of a continuing deadly pattern of strikes observed in 
densely populated areas across Ukraine. Between December 2025 and May 2026, civilian 
casualties increased by 40 per cent compared with the same period a year earlier, according to 
the Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine. 
Civilians in Kyiv and across the country should not be bracing for yet another attack; they are 
protected under international humanitarian law.  
Kyiv, 2 July 2026 
*** 
 For further information, please contact: 
Viktoriia Andriievska, OCHA: +380 50 419 63 23, viktoriia.andriievska@un.org 
OCHA press releases are available at www.unocha.org or www.reliefweb.int