Situation Update 
3 June 2026 / KHRG #25-176-S1 
 
 
Kler Lwee Htoo District Situation Update: Burma Army  
attacks caused death, injuries, property damage, 
displacement, and  challenges to villagers’ daily routine in 
Moo Township (February to May 2025) 
 
  
This Situation Update describes events occurring in Moo (Mone) Township, Kler Lwee Htoo (Nyaunglibin) 
District, during the period between February and May 2025. On 18 February 2025, Burma Army Infantry 
Battalion (IB) #73 from Zay atgyi Town fired two howitzer shells into Kl--- village, Nyaung Pin Tha village 
tract. The resulting explosions injured two villagers, including a woman on her legs and neck  and her 12-
year-old son on his left thumb, in addition to damaging two houses. On 3 March 2025 and 3 April 2025, 
Burma Army Light Infantry Battalion ( LIB) #351, based in Ler Doh army camp , fired 120 mm shells into 
Haw Hkoh Ghaw village tract . Shrapnel from t he mortar shells injured a young woman on her legs and 
forehead and damaged villagers’ property, including the houses of two villagers. Additionally, on 14 April 
2025, Burma Army IB #5 , based in Nyaung Pi Tha  army camp, fired two 120 mm mortar shells into Yt--- 
village, Pin Za Lot village t ract, Moo special area, injuring two villagers and damaging two houses, due to 
the shrapnel from the explosion . On 28 April 2025, a Burma Army fighter jet carried out an air strike  on 
Za--- village, K anyin Tan village tract, Moo special area , killing three villagers , injuring  a 20 -month-old 
child, and damaging four houses. On 5 May 2025, Burma Army LIB #439 fired a mortar shell into Y z--- 
village, Pa Ya La Ha village tract, Moo special area , injuring one villager when the shrapnel struck her 
neck. Consequently, due to the shelling and air st rikes conducted by the Burma Army, some villagers 
needed to displace, and it caused disturbance to the villagers in from Moo Township.  During the reporting 
period, Burma Army travel restrictions worsened villagers’ travel challenges and livelihood situations; 
attacks by the Burma Army impacted children’s education; and villagers faced challenges accessing 
needed healthcare services.1 
  
 
 
Burma Army shelling caused casualties, destruction, and displacement 
 
After the SAC [State Administration Council2, now referred to as the Burma Army3] seized power 
[in the 2021 coup] , they conducted activities  such as firing mortar shells into villages in Moo 
 
1 The present document is based on information received in February, March, April, and May 2025. It was provided 
by a community member in Kler Lwee Htoo District  who has been trained by KHRG as a researcher to monitor 
human rights conditions on the ground. The names of the victims, their photos and the exact locations are censored 
for security reasons. The parts in square brackets are explanations added by KHRG. This document combines 
several received reports with the following KHRG internal log numbers: #25 -75-D1; #25-82-D1; #25-122-D1; #25-
136-D1; #25-184-D1; #25-198-D1; and #25-176-S1. 
2 The State Administration Council (SAC) was the name of the executive governing body of the Burma military 
regime created in the aftermath of the 1 February  2021 military coup. It was established by Senior General Min 
Aung Hlaing on 2 February 2021 and was composed of eight military officers and eight civilians. The chairperson 
serves as the de facto head of government of Burma/Myanmar and leads the Military Cabinet of Myanmar, the 
executive branch of the government. Min Aung Hlaing assumed the role of SAC chairperson following the coup.
2 
(Mone) Township, Kler Lwee Htoo ( Nyaunglibin) District, so the villagers ha d to face difficulties 
such as displacement, injuries, and destruction. On 18 February 2025, at 8:15 pm, the SAC IB 
[Infantry Battalion] 4 #73, based in Zay atgyi Town  army camp [located in Moo Township] , 
indiscriminately fired two  howitzer shells into Kl--- village, Nyaung Pin Tha village tract 5, Moo 
Township, and the first howitzer shell landed on the garden of Maung 6 J---, so his house and 
belongings were damaged. However, he was not injured.  
 
Simultaneously, they [the Burma Army] fired another [second] howitzer shell. The howitzer shell 
landed and exploded underneath the house of U 7 D---. A 40-year-old named Daw8 R---, who is 
the wife of U D---, was injured on both  her legs and her neck. Also, their son, Maung B--- (12 
years old) was hit on his left thumb and lost it. Due to the injuries, they were immediately sent to 
Rk--- clinic, located in Rk--- village, Moo special area, Moo Township, administered by the CDM 
[Civil Disobedience Movement ]9. They provided free treatment to the injured villagers. 
Afterward, due to the severity of Daw R---’s leg injuries, she was transferred to Taw Oo public 
hospital, located in Taw Oo Town and administ ered by the SAC. [It is unknown how much Daw 
R--- had to pay for the treatments.]  His [U D---’s] house was also damaged, and his belongings 
such as a motorcycle, television, and other properties were damaged by the explosion, including 
kitchen supplies. 
 
 
The military junta changed its name on 31 July 2025 from SAC to State Security and Peace Commission (SSPC), 
with Min Aung Hlaing retaining his position as chairperson. 
3 The terms Burma military, Burma Army, SAC, Tatmadaw, and junta are used interchangeably throughout this 
report to describe the Burma military regime’s armed forces. Villagers themselves commonly use Burma Army, 
Burmese soldiers, or alternatively the name adopted by the Burma military regime at the time —from the 2021 coup 
to July 2025, the State Administration Council (SAC). On 31 July 2025, the military junta changed its name to the 
State Security and Peace Commission (SSPC). 
4 An Infantry Battalion (IB) comprises 500 soldiers. However, most Infantry Battalions in the Tatmadaw are under -
strength with less than 200 soldiers. Yet up to date information regarding the size of battalions is hard to come by, 
particularly following the signing of the NCA. They are primarily used for garrison duty but are sometimes used in 
offensive operations. 
5 A village tract is an administrative unit of between five and 20 villages in a local area, often centred on a large 
village. 
6 ‘Maung’ is a Burmese male honorific title used before a person’s name. 
7 ‘U’ is a Burmese title used for elder men, used before their name. 
8 ‘Daw’ is a Burmese female honorific title used before a person’s name. 
9 On 2 February 2021, healthcare workers at state -run hospitals and medical facilities across Myanmar spearheaded 
what is being referred to as a Civil Disobedience Movement (CDM) consisting of labour strikes in protest against 
the 1 February 2021 military coup. The movement quickly spread to include civil servants from all sectors of the 
government who are walking off their jobs as a way of non -recognition and non-participation in the military regime. 
Because of the popularity of the movement, and its seminal role in wider protests across the country, some people 
have begun using it as a catch-all phrase to include other protest forms like boycotts and pot-banging.
3 
 
 
On 3 March 2025, at 8:35 pm, SAC soldiers from LIB [Light Infantry Battalion]10 #351, based in 
Ler Doh [army camp], fired two 120 mm mortar shells into Tk--- village, Haw Hkoh Ghaw village 
tract, Moo Township. The mortar shells landed on the garden of Saw 11 K--- and hit the 
belongings of Saw K---, such as petrol (diesel) and engine fuel (diesels) ; 20 big tins of fuel , 
which were burnt ; some rice sacks , which  were damaged ; his diesel engine ; a dynamo  [an 
electric engine part] ; the warehouse’s wall and roof , which were hit; a motorcycle, which was 
burnt; and his tractor, which was damaged as well.  
 
 
10 A Light Infantry Battalion (LIB) comprises 500 soldiers. Most Light Infantry Battalions in the Tatmadaw are 
under-strength with less than 200 soldiers, yet up-to-date information regarding the size of battalions is hard to come 
by, particularly following the signing of the NCA. LIBs are primarily used for offensive operations, but they are 
sometimes used for garrison duties. 
11 ‘Saw’ is a S’gaw Karen male honorific title used before a person’s name.  
 
These photos were taken in February 2025, in Kl--- 
village, Nyaung Pin Tha village tract, Moo (Mone) 
Township, Kler Lwee Htoo (Nyaunglibin) District. On 
18 February 2025, at 8:15 pm, Burma Army Infantry 
Battalion (IB) #73, based in Zayatgyi Town army 
camp, indiscriminately fired two howitzer shells into 
Kl--- village. The photos above show the house of 
Maung J---, which was damaged by the first shell. The 
photo below shows the motorbike of U D---, which 
was destroyed by the second howitzer shell. [Photos: 
KHRG]
4 
 
 
On 3 April 2025, SAC soldiers from LIB #351, based in Ler Doh army camp , indiscriminately 
fired two 120 mm mortar shells into Tk--- village, causing destruction. Because the SAC soldiers 
deliberately targeted the village  [a belief held by villagers due to the fact that armed resistance 
groups occasionally pass through the village] and fired a mortar into the village, the mortar shell 
landed and exploded on the house of a villager from Tk--- village named N aw12 M---. None of 
 
12 ‘Naw’ is a S’gaw Karen female honorific title used before a person’s name.  
 
  
 
  
 
  
These photos were taken in March 2025 , in Tk--- village, Hawh Hkoh Ghaw village  tract, Moo Township, Kler 
Lwee Htoo District. On 3 March 2025, at 8:35 pm, Burma Army Light Infantry Battalion (LIB) #351, based in 
Ler Doh army camp , fired two 120 mm mortar shells into Tk--- village, and the mortar shells landed in the 
garden of a Tk--- villager named Saw K---. The four photos above show the tractor and the motorbike of Saw K--
-, which were damaged by the shelling. The next two photos show containers of diesel and rice sacks, which were 
also damaged by the shrapnel of the explosion. The photos in the last row show the tails and shrapnel of the 
mortar shells that landed and exploded in Saw K---’s garden.  [Photos: KHRG]
5 
the house owners were at home during the attack , so there were no casualties. Only the house 
and the roof of the house sustained significant damage.  
 
However, the shrapnel from the explosion of the mortar shell scattered throughout the 
surrounding area and struck the house of another villager , named Saw T---. His 23 -year-old 
daughter, Naw L---, was injured on her  left leg and forehead. Because of the severity of her 
[Naw L---’s] leg injury caused by the shrapnel, local medics provided initial treatment and later 
referred her to Tl--- hospital [ administered by the Karen Department of Health and Welfare 
(KDHW)13 located in Tl--- village, P’Nah Wah Plaw village tract, Moo Township] for further 
treatment. They [villagers] do not need to pay treatment fees  [at Tl--- hospital]. His [Saw T---’s] 
house was also damaged. 
 
 
 
On 14 April 2025, at around 1  pm, SAC soldiers from IB #5 , based in Nyaung Pin Tha village 
tract, indiscriminately fired two  120 mm mortar shells into Yt--- village, Pin Za  Lot village tract, 
Moo special area. One of the mortar shells landed on a road in the village , [causing]  no 
casualties. The remaining mortar shell landed close to the houses of Maung A--- and Ko14 Z---, 
 
13 The Karen Department of Health and Welfare (KDHW) is the health department of the Karen National Union. It 
was established in 1956 to address the lack of public healthcare resources in rural Southeast Myanmar. It currently 
operates a network of community -based clinics in the region, but its capabilities remain limited due to funding 
constraints. 
14 ‘Ko’ is a Burmese male honorific title used before a person’s name. 
 
 
These photos were taken in April 2025 , in Tl--- hospital, located in Tl--- village, P’Nah Wah Plaw village tract, 
Moo Township, Kler Lwee Htoo District. On 3 April 2025, Burma Army  Light Infantry Battalion (LIB) #351, 
based in Ler Doh army camp, indiscriminately fired two mortar shells into Tk--- village, Hawh Hkoh Ghaw 
village tract, Moo Township . One of the mortar shells landed and exploded on the house of Naw M---, a villager 
from Tk--- village, and her house roof was destroyed by the explosion. The shra pnel of the explosion also hi t the 
house of Saw T--- and injured his 23 -year-old daughter, named Naw L---, on her forehead and left leg. The left 
photo shows Naw L--- receiving emergency treatment in Tl--- hospital and the right photo shows the roof of Saw 
T---’s house, which was destroyed by the mortar.  [Photos: KHRG]
6 
so their houses were damaged, and it also injured two villagers from Yt--- village. A 57-year-old 
named U Y--- was injured on his right armpit, and a 30 -year-old named Maung I--- was injured 
on his back. Their injuries were not severe, so they received treatment from the local people 
responsible for healthcare [health workers] assigned by the KDHW. Villagers believe that when 
the SAC heard the information [received air reconnaissance] that villagers from Yt--- village set 
up a stage to celebrate the water festival, they [ the Burma Army ] acted arbitrarily and 
oppressively towards the villagers by conducting mortar shelling. Because the SAC conducted 
mortar shell ing into the [Yt---] village, the villagers no longer dared to celebrate the water 
festival; furthermore, they moved to nearby villages to escape from the SAC oppression.  
 
On 5 May 2025, at 8 am, soldiers from SAC Light Infantry Battalion (LIB) #439 conducted 
indiscriminate shelling of mortars into Yz--- village, Pa Ya La Ha village tract, Moo special area. 
The mortars landed beside Ma N---’s house (a Yz--- villager) and the mortar shrapnel injured Ma 
N---’s neck. Because the mortar shrapnel remained in her bone, she was transported to  a 
community clinic  administered by the KDHW. The health workers from the community clinic 
could not remove the shrapnel, so she was transported to Zk---’s hospital (general hospital) for 
further treatment. But doctors from the Zk--- hospital did not have enough medical equipment to 
remove the shrapnel, so they said that they would transport her to a hospital in Yangon city. The 
injured person’s family was not confident enough [d id not feel safe] to send her to Yangon 
hospital [due to their security concern s about travelling to Yangon] , so they came back and 
transported her to a hospital in the KNU [Karen National Union] 15 area. A villager from Yz--- 
village named U Q--- said: “Before the SAC’s soldiers  conducted mortar shelling , the PDF 
[People’s Defence Force ]16’s soldiers came into the village. B ecause they [the SAC] heard 
about that, they conducted mortar shelling into the village. But the mortars landed far away from 
[where] the PDF soldiers had sheltered; it landed into their place [Ma N--- house]. But the SAC’s 
soldiers do not only conduct mortar  shelling when they hear their enemies live in the village ; 
they always conduct indiscriminate shelling into the village.”  
 
 
Burma Army air strike caused death, damage, and displacement 
On 28 April 2025, at around 10:15 am, a n SAC fighter jet conducted an air strike into Za--- 
village, Kanyin Tan village tract, Moo special area. The air strike killed three villagers from Za--- 
village named Ma17 O--- (44 years old), who was decapitated; U S--- (40 years old), who was hit 
on his bladder; and Ma V--- (50 years old), who was hit on her belly . They all died on the spot. 
Ma O--- was cleaning her house, U S--- was using his phone on his hammock under his stilted 
house, and Ma V--- was reading Tripitaka [a book of Buddhist scriptures] while the air strike was 
conducted.18 
 
The shrapnel from the explosion also injured Ma W--- (a female child), who is 1 year and 8 
months old. The shrapnel hit her face below her eye , and she was transported to an SAC-run 
hospital in Zk--- Town. Due to the severity of her injury, she was then transferred to a hospital in 
 
15 The Karen National Union (KNU) is the main Karen political organisation. It was established in 1947 and has 
been in conflict with the government since 1949. The KNU wields power across large areas of Southeast Myanmar 
and has been calling for the creation of a democratic federal system since 1976. Although it signed the Nationwide 
Ceasefire Agreement (NCA) in 2015, following  the 2021 coup staged by Burma Army leaders, the KNU officially 
stated that the NCA has become void. 
16 The People’s Defence Force (PDF) is an armed resistance established independently as local civilian militias 
operating across the country. Following the February 1st 2021 military coup and the ongoing brutal violence enacted 
by the junta, the majority of these groups began working with the National Unity Government (NUG), a body 
claiming to be the legitimate government of Burma/Myanmar, which then formalized the PDF on 5 May 2021 as a 
precursor to a federal army. 
17 ‘Ma’ is a Burmese female honorific title used before a person’s name. 
18 KHRG, “ Kler Lwee Htoo District Incident Report: SAC air strike caused casualties, including a child, and 
destruction in Moo Township (April 2025)”, December 2025.
7 
Taw Oo Town, Taw Oo District, run by the SAC; then, finally, she was transferred once more to 
a hospital in Yangon [city]. Her family paid for her transportation and treatment themselves. 
They did not receive any support from any organisations or individuals. Both transportation and 
treatment cost 370,000 kyats (176.19 USD19) in total.  
 
Due to the air strike, houses of villagers from Za--- village, owned by U C---, U G---, Ko H---, and 
Ma E---, were damaged. 
 
The villagers have no idea why the SAC conducted  an air strike in to the village. The villagers 
had to suffer injury and death because the fighter jet conducted the air strike unexpectedly, and 
air strike s were not conducted in the village before. Also, on the date the air strike was 
conducted, there w as no fighting happen ing in the village, although fighting was happening to 
the south of the village , one hour away by motorbike . The father of the victim named Ma O---, 
who is named U X---, stated: “In the past, aircraft used to come like this. But it was only striking 
in fighting areas.  So, we were careless. 20 We thought the aircraft went there because fighting 
had occurred. Then, at around 10:15 am, an aircraft conducted an air strike onto the village. On 
that day, my daughter [Ma O---] told me that she would go back to her house and do cleaning. 
[…] She then was hit on her head, and her head was decapitated by the shrapnel.”  
 
After the incident, when the villagers heard the sound of aircraft, they were scared because they 
worried the aircraft would conduct an air strike again. They also hid in their makeshift bunker to 
avoid the danger of the aircraft. Some of the villagers fled to other villages, and some fled to 
Pyu Town just to avoid the potential harm of the air strikes.   
 
 
Burma Army attacks caused displacement  
 
The villagers in Moo Township faced displacement due to the SAC army conduct ing mortar 
shelling and air strike s into villages, as well as SAC soldiers sheltering in the villages. So, they 
[villagers] were no longer able to live in the villages. Therefore, they had to move to the villages 
that were far from [the area where] these types of SAC violations [happened]. Some villagers 
fled to their plantations and some fled to a forest. Because they did not have the chance to live 
in their villages and they ha d to displace, the consequences were [that they had] insufficient 
foods and they d id not always have work; because they had to work for daily wages, it created 
difficulty for their livelihoods. Also, there were difficulties [in finding] places to live, and they had 
to live like that [in forests or on plantations, without adequate shelter, food, or work].  
 
 
Conflict between armed groups and flooding caused travel restrictions for local villagers 
 
When civilians travelled, they always had to be alert due to the fighting in some area s in Moo 
Township. Some of the villagers are shopkeeper s, and they face d difficulties travelling into 
towns to buy things and coming back to sell in the villages, as the distances are far to travel . In 
addition, the SAC army stayed [set up checkpoints] on the road, conducted interrogations, and 
demanded [money], and [as a result] the price of commodities increased. In the rainy season, it 
was very difficult to travel and do business, because the roads were not good; there was mud in 
 
19 All conversion estimates for the kyat in this report are based on the 4 March 2026 official market rate  of 2,100 
kyats to 1 USD, https://wise.com/gb/currency-converter/usd-to-mmk-rate. 
20 Some villagers express human rights violations or abuses that they have suffered as part of their fate or luck, or 
express that they should have taken more precautions, rather than directly attributing the abuse or impact to the 
Burma military regime or other powerful actors who commit these violations. KHRG has not modified the villager’s 
words to preserve the local voice, while as an organisation also emphasising the overall pattern and source of 
indiscriminate human rights violations in Southeast Burma.
8 
the fields and flooding; and in the places that there were no boats and bridges, it was difficult to 
cross rivers.  
 
 
Education challenges due to Burma Army attacks 
 
Regarding education in Moo Township, the challenges started after the SAC seized power [ in 
the 2021 coup]. Before the 2025 academic year, schools in Moo Township were administered 
by the SAC. But in this year [2025], they [ the SAC] were no longer able to control the area, 
because the KNU controlled the area , so the schools were administered by the KECD [Karen 
Education and Cultural Department]21. Some schools are primary and some are middle schools. 
Only a few schools are high schools. 
 
In the beginning of 2025, the villagers planned to send their children to school, but they were not 
confident enough for this , because they ha d security concerns due to the SAC seizing power.  
They [the SAC] conducted offensive military operation s, such as firing mortar shells, carrying 
out drone strikes, and conducting air strikes. So, villagers lacked security.  
 
 
Healthcare  
 
Regarding healthcare in Moo Township area, it has difficulties and weakness es; for example, if 
severe and serious injuries occur  [to the villagers] , there are insufficient medicines and not 
enough doctors. Furthermore, if related-blood diseases [hematologic diseases] occur, they have 
to face [the challenge that] there are no [available] medicines for  it. About pregnant women 
giving birth, if they cannot give birth easily and need surgery to give birth, they have to go to a 
hospital in town to receive surgical treatment. For some of the villagers, if they suffer from an 
internal disease and need to find out about the disease [receive a diagnosis], there are no x-ray 
and ultrasound machines. So, they have to get it at the hospital from towns such as Pyu hospital 
[located in Pyu Town, Kler Lwee Htoo District] and Taw Oo hospital  [located in Taw Oo Town, 
Taw Oo District]. Regarding patients, if they have to go to  a hospital in town, the difficulties that 
they have to face are the far distance, difficulty to travel, and car rental fees.  
 
 
Conclusion 
 
These are the authentic incidents which happened in the area [Moo Township]  that I [the 
researcher] documented in this report . As the information show s above, after the SAC seized 
power [ in the February 2021 coup], the villagers have faced various difficulties. Due to the  
ongoing fighting, travel has become  difficult; shelling resulted in casualties, destructions, and 
displacement; and there were disruptions to education and healthcare. Because of the brutality 
of the conflict, villagers have adopted different strategies  to protect their [own] lives. However, 
some villagers have face d violations unexpectedly, and as a result , they have been unable to 
avoid such violations [employ agency strategies]. These challenges persist because there is still 
no peace in the country. Despite this, villagers continue to hope for a better life and lasting 
peace in the country. 
 
 
 
 
 
21 The Karen National Union's Education and Culture Department is the education department of the Karen National 
Union. Its main goals are to provide mother tongue education services to rural Karen populations in Southeast 
Burma, as well as to preserve the Karen language, culture, and history. Despite being an important education 
provider in the region, it is not officially recognised by the Burma government.
9 
Further background reading on the situation of human rights abuses in Kler Lwee Htoo District 
can be found in the following KHRG reports: 
• Stolen Childhoods: Violations of children’s rights, urgent needs, and local agency in rural 
Southeast Burma during the conflict, October 2025. 
• “Kler Lwee Htoo District Incident Report: Burma Army shelling injured a villager in Moo 
Township (December 2025)”, April 2026. 
• “Photo Set: Shelling of villages in Southeast Burma by the Burma Army, the BGF, and 
other affiliated armed groups, and its impacts (January to November 2025) ”, December 
2025. 
 
 
About KHRG 
  
Founded in 1992, Karen Human Rights Group is an independent local organisation committed 
to improving the human rights situation in  Southeast Burma. KHRG trains local people to 
document and gather evidence of human rights abuses , and publishes this information to 
project the voices, experiences and perspectives of local communities. More examples of our 
work can be seen online at www.khrg.org.
10