Palestinians in Gaza still face daily attacks, extreme suffering and denial of their basic rights as the crisis passes 1,000 days, Islamic Relief says.


Over the past 1,000 days Israeli actions have targeted the fabric of Gaza’s entire society – killing families, blocking aid, destroying infrastructure and economic production, and herding civilians into crowded ghettoes. For 1,000 days we have seen unprecedented disregard for international law and a colossal global failure to protect civilians, all of which continues despite the ceasefire announcement.


An ongoing humanitarian catastrophe


More than 65% of Gaza is now off limits to Palestinians as Israel has entrenched and expanded its military control – cutting people off from homes, essential services and most agricultural land beyond the so-called “yellow line” and “orange line”. Even before the current escalation, Gaza was one of the most densely populated places on earth and now almost its entire population is confined to less than one third of its territory.


Displaced families are crammed into rodent-infested shelters and tents eroded by severe heat and rain, with open sewage running beside them. Skin diseases are rampant among children due to the overcrowding and poor sanitation.


More food is now getting into Gaza but it is usually low in nutritional value – most people get to eat fruit less than once a week, and some families still go entire days without eating anything at all. Thousands of children need treatment for malnutrition every month.


Vital supplies blocked


Israel’s 19-year blockade of Gaza remains in place despite the ceasefire announcement, restricting the movement of people and goods in and out of the territory.


Wheelchairs and artificial limbs for injured people have been blocked. Fuel for hospitals, bakeries and water systems is restricted. Good quality tents and shelter materials are impeded, along with vital health and education supplies and chemical sprays that could stop the rodent infestation in shelters.


Since the ceasefire announcement an average of just 128 trucks a day have reached their destination in Gaza – less than a quarter of the minimum 600 trucks a day stipulated in the ceasefire agreement, which itself is far less than what is actually needed. International and local humanitarian organisations face increasing impediments to assisting vulnerable people.


Daily attacks continue


While the ceasefire announcement slowed the killing, it has not stopped it. At least 1,059 Palestinians have been killed since the ceasefire came into effect – an average of four people killed and 13 more wounded every single day. Gaza now has the highest concentration of child amputees in the world.


Gaza’s entire society has been targeted – doctors, teachers, entrepreneurs, journalists, academics, poets, engineers, farmers. Around a quarter of a million people, 10% of Gaza’s entire pre-war population, have been killed or wounded.


Less than 1% of rubble has been cleared


The scale of destruction over the past 1,000 days is unprecedented. More than three quarters of homes are damaged or destroyed. 93% of schools need reconstruction or major repairs, along with 89% of water and sanitation infrastructure and 87% of roads. Only 4% of Gaza’s agricultural land is now usable, with the rest either destroyed or inaccessible.


Rebuilding infrastructure and the economy is desperately needed, yet less than 1% of the millions of tonnes of rubble has been cleared so far.


Health facilities critically short of supplies


Only 5% of health services in Gaza – and not a single hospital – are fully functioning. Medics are dealing with critical shortages of almost everything – from fuel and electricity to keep services running, to drugs and supplies such as insulin, blood banks and disinfectant agents. Patients with cancer and kidney disease live in agony because treatment is unavailable.


Thousands of severely ill patients are still waiting for permission to leave Gaza for medical treatment in the West Bank or abroad – yet so far in 2026 less than 10% of patients on the evacuation list have been able to leave.


1,000 days too many: The world must act now


World leaders have categorically failed to protect Palestinians for the past 1,000 days, and political attention has waned since the ceasefire announcement.


After 1,000 days international governments must step up pressure to hold parties accountable and ensure a real ceasefire so people can live in safety and dignity. Civilians must be protected from violence, and humanitarian supplies must not be impeded or politicised. Recovery and reconstruction in Gaza must be led and owned by Palestinians and driven by local needs, not externally imposed. Ultimately, there can be no sustainable peace without an end to the illegal occupation of Palestine.


Notes to editors


Islamic Relief has worked in Gaza for more than 30 years, providing humanitarian aid and supporting people’s livelihoods. Throughout the current crisis Islamic Relief has provided emergency food, water, healthcare, psychosocial support and other assistance, reaching around 600,000 people. Despite the current challenges Islamic Relief continues to support maternal healthcare, temporary learning spaces, vegetable distributions and food vouchers, and assistance for orphaned children.