M6.7 EARTHQUAKE IN PALU, CENTRAL SULAWESI
INDONESIA
FLASH UPDATE #1
TUESDAY
16 JUNE 2026
1800 HRS UTC +7
DATA SOURCES
ASEAN Disaster Monitoring & Response System (DMRS); Pacific Disaster Center (PDC Global);
Indonesia: BNPB, BMKG
Philippines: NDRRMC
Verified news media agencies.
© 2026 AHA Centre.
All rights reserved.
You are receiving this email because you are 
registered in our distribution list.
Our mailing address is:
AHA Centre,
GRAHA BNPB 13th Floor, 
Jl. Raya Pramuka Kav. 38,
Jakarta 13120 Indonesia
DISCLAIMER
The  AHA Centre was established in November 2011 by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Member States to facil itate cooperation and coordination among the Member States, 
relevant agencies of the United Nations, and international organisations in disaster management and humanitarian assistance. 
The use of boundaries, geographic names, related information and potential considerations for response are for reference, not warranted to be error free or implying official endorsement from ASEAN 
Member States.
Disclosure: The names, boundaries, colours, designations, and other information shown on the associated maps above do not imply any opinion or 
judgement by the AHA Centre or PDC regarding the legal status of any territory, nor do they constitute endorsement or accepta nce of such 
boundaries. The Key Figures, including population and capital exposure, are derived from PDC’s All Hazards Impact Model (AIM) . Capital exposure 
represents the value of existing infrastructure exposed to potential hazard impacts and should not be interpreted as an estim ate of damages or 
losses. The Key Figures are accessible through the ASEAN Disaster Monitoring and Response System (ASEAN -DMRS).
KEY FIGURES
● OVERVIEW: At 1027 HRS UTC+7 on 16 June 2026, BMKG reported a magnitude 6.7 earthquake (depth 16
km, corrected from 10km), with the epicentre located on land at 1.04° S and 120.23 E°, about 42 km
southeast of Palu, Central Sulawesi. BMKG modeling results indicated no tsunami potential. Meanwhile, as
of 1330H UTC+7, BMKG monitoring showed 71 aftershocks with the highest magnitude being M5.2.
● PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS: According to BMKG, considering the location of the epicentre and the depth of
the hypocentre, the earthquake was a shallow earthquake caused by the activity of the Sausu fault.
BMKG’s analysis of the source mechanism indicated that the earthquake had an oblique normal faulting
mechanism with a downward strike-slip movement. Based on its magnitude and depth, the earthquake
was expected to generate moderate to severe ground shaking across the affected areas..
● IMPACTS AND DAMAGES: BMKG and BNPB reported that the earthquake generated strong ground
shaking across Central Sulawesi, reaching VII MMI in Palolo and Sigi, VI–VII MMI in Torue, Parigi Moutong,
and South Parigi, and V–VI MMI in Palu City and Sigi Biromaru. Tremors were also felt in Donggala and
Poso. Reports indicate that residents in several affected areas panicked and evacuated their homes due to
concerns over possible aftershocks.
o Preliminary assessments indicate moderate structural damage to several buildings across Palu City, Sigi
Regency, and Parigi Moutong Regency. Detailed damage assessments are ongoing by local authorities.
(BNPB, BMKG)
● RESPONSE EFFORTS:
o BNPB and Local Disaster Management Authority (BPBD) in Palu City, Donggala, Poso, Sigi Regency,
and Parigi Moutong Regencies continue to coordinate with relevant agencies to monitor and assess the
impact and damages from the earthquake. Authorities immediately provided assistance to affected
localities.
o BMKG has dispatched a special team to conduct survey and directly assess the impact of the
earthquake on the ground.
o BMKG urged the public to stay away from buildings cracked or damaged by the earthquake and to
increase vigilance for potential aftershocks.
The AHA Centre continues to closely monitor the situation in coordination with BNPB and will provide
updates as necessary. The AHA Centre EOC remains at ORANGE Alert level, activated following the M7.8
Earthquake in Sarangani that affected North Sulawesi, Indonesia and Regions IX, XI, XII, and BARMM,
Philippines, and is maintaining close coordination with BNPB Indonesia and NDRRMC Philippines. The
AHA Centre remains on standby should the affected countries welcome assistance from ASEAN.
Damaged house in Palu City following the 
M6.7 earthquake (Source: Antara, BPBD)
Patients evacuated from a hospital in Palu 
following the M6.7 earthquake (Source: Antara)
One of the earthquake-damaged building in 
Palu City (Source: Kompas, AFP)