The tenuous ceasefire in Gaza is “far from perfect”, with ongoing Israeli attacks and no tangible recovery in sight for territory’s beleaguered Palestinian population, Gaza’s High Representative on the newly established Board of Peace told the Security Council today.
Nickolay Mladenov — who was formerly the UN Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process — briefed the 15-member Council on the occasion of the release of the Board’s first report (document 
S/2026/418
), and six months since the parties signed onto the United States-brokered “Comprehensive Plan to End the Gaza Conflict” — widely known as the Washington Accord.
No Recovery in Gaza
He said that while the guns have largely fallen silent and food security for Palestinians has meaningfully improved, “there is no recovery in Gaza”.  Some 80 per cent of buildings in the Strip were damaged or destroyed, more than 1 million people lack permanent shelter, work and water are scarce and health and education systems have not been rebuilt.
Meanwhile, he said, civilians are still being killed, families still live in fear, and movement restrictions continue to obstruct daily life.  The withdrawal of Israeli troops from Gaza, required by the ceasefire, has not yet taken place as Hamas has failed to commit to its main obligation — complete disarmament.  Israeli restrictions and delays in delivering humanitarian aid are shaping Palestinians’ perceptions of whether the war is truly over.
Emphasizing that every ceasefire violation “risks unravelling what has been painstakingly built”, he urged Hamas to accept the proposed disarmament road map and Israel to uphold all its commitments.  Diplomacy must continue, but “not as an excuse for delay while 2 million people wait in desperate conditions”, he stressed, adding that the Council should accept “nothing less” than the honouring of commitments made by all sides and endorsed by its own 
resolution 2803 (2025)
.
“We cannot ignore the current alarming trends, or their dire implications for Palestinians, Israelis, and the entire region,” agreed Ramiz Alakbarov, Deputy Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and UN Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.  “As I brief you today, the situation across the [Territory] is increasingly precarious.”
He added that settler-related violence and incitement are also driving tensions in the West Bank.  Humanitarian needs are acute, with the population dependent on daily aid deliveries that remain restricted, despite some improvement.  Funding also remains highly constrained, with just over $540 million received of the more than $4 billion required.
Gazans ‘Cannot Take More War’, Deputy Special Coordinator Warns
Meanwhile, he said calls for resumed widespread hostilities are emerging, even as talks continue towards the second phase of the Washington Accord.  Resolution 2803 (2025), which endorsed the ceasefire, must be fully implemented, including the disarmament of Hamas, Israeli withdrawal and deployment of the International Stabilization Force.  “Let me be clear — the people of Gaza cannot take more war,” he stressed.  “This scenario must be avoided at all costs.”
Humanitarian Aid ‘Far Below’ Actual Need
Rami Hijjo
, 
Director of humanitarian projects in the Gaza Strip for the Palestine Red Crescent Society, also addressed the Council.  Detailing the harrowing conditions under which humanitarian workers operate, he said his organization lost 56 staff members, 30 of them while on duty.
“We are operating under extremely harsh and complex conditions,” he said, noting that his group’s 12 ambulances in the West Bank remain unable to enter Gaza due to Israeli restrictions.  Humanitarian assistance received since the beginning of 2026 remains far below actual needs, medical teams cannot reach patients and entire families — including the very sick and elderly — are forced to reside in plastic tents.
Meanwhile, he said, a severe rodent infestation is spreading through the rubble.  Sharing the story of an elderly woman who was bitten and suffered major health complications as a result, he added:  “Every single day is a battle for basic survival.”
‘Notable’ Gains Overshadowed by Israel Ceasefire Breaches, Hamas Refusal to Disarm
Council members also shared their views of progress made and gaps remaining, with widely diverging opinions.
Several speakers welcomed the progress outlined in the Board of Peace report, while acknowledging that “considerable challenges” remain.  The representative of Greece joined others in welcoming the overall holding of the ceasefire, despite many reported violations.  Humanitarian aid delivery has also been scaled up and all the hostages released, she said, adding:  “These are notable achievements, unthinkable seven or eight months ago.”  However, peace will remain incomplete without further action by both parties, she said.
The representative of the United States said the remaining challenges in Gaza can be overcome if nations work together. Her country will cooperate with Israel, Türkiye, Qatar and others on the Board of Peace to ensure the Washington Accord’s full implementation.  Noting that the diversion of humanitarian aid by armed groups has been virtually eliminated, she said there is no replacement for the critical next step:  “Hamas must demilitarize — full stop.”  Under the auspices of the National Committee for the Administration of Gaza, the territory will be fully deradicalized, she said, finally becoming a “terror-free zone” that poses no threat to its neighbours. 
Panama’s delegate said that, despite partial progress, “relief remains insufficient” compared to the pace of deterioration on the ground.  Underscoring that UN support remains essential for any current or future peace initiatives, he said:  “The path towards a just, dignified and sustainable peace between Israelis and Palestinians doesn’t need to be reinvented — it needs political will to be implemented.”
“The past six months have not brought lasting peace to Gaza,” agreed Denmark’s speaker, describing a level of conflict that is “neither war nor peace”.  Echoed by the representatives of Pakistan, Somalia and Latvia, she said all parties must respect the ceasefire and Israel must lift aid restrictions.
Calls for Board of Peace to Take More Responsibility
China’s representative agreed, adding that the guarantors of the Washington Accord must take more responsibility to ensure its implementation.  He joined several other speakers, including Liberia’s delegate, in strongly rejecting Israel’s contentious decision to build a military facility on the former Sheikh Jarrah compound of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
Several speakers, including the representative of France, demanded that Gaza’s recovery process begin without delay, emphasizing that it cannot be conditional upon Hamas’ disarmament and pressing the Board of Peace for a timeline on recovery and reconstruction efforts. Noting that his country contributed to the UN’s multiparty Horizon Fund for Palestine, he also welcomed the European Union’s adoption of sanctions targeting major Israeli organizations involved in recent violent settlement activities in the West Bank.
Colombia’s speaker, drawing upon international legal statutes and echoed by the representative of Bahrain, said the withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza and the right of Palestinians to self-determination can never be considered conditional.  Nor can Israel’s expansion of territorial control — with the Palestinian people increasingly being pushed into smaller and more fragmented areas — be tolerated. 
The representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo agreed, adding that international legal provisions governing the protection of civilians remain “overriding obligations” even during times of conflict.
Moscow Calls Gaza Road Map ‘Dead Letter’, as State of Palestine Condemns Collective Punishment, Israel Cautions against ‘Dangerous Illusion’ of Diplomacy
“Six months after the vote on resolution 2803 (2025), the Trump plan largely remains dead letter,” said the representative of the Russian Federation, recalling that his country abstained in that vote due to serious concerns over the text’s content. Moscow decided not to veto it, given calls from many regional countries “to give the United States’ blueprint a chance”. 
Regrettably, he said, those concerns have now been borne out.  Promises to turn Gaza into the “Riveria of the Middle East” turned out to be hollow, with more than 800 people killed and 2,600 injured in Gaza since the ceasefire.  “Those who read the Board of Peace report may come under the impression that Hamas alone is to blame for all the misfortunes facing Gaza,” he said.  In fact, Israel continues to withhold aid and dangle promises of skyscrapers and jobs, even as it occupies Gaza and embraces provocative policies. 
Also addressing the Council, the Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine confirmed the many reports citing serious aid restrictions, increasing Israeli annexation of Palestinian land and homes, and attacks on both civilians and aid workers.  Noting that the term “terrorist” has often been used by Israeli officials to characterize the entire Palestinian population, he drew attention to the recent mistreatment of pro-Palestinian foreign nationals aboard an aid flotilla — something also raised by many of today’s speakers — describing it as a “glimpse of the treatment reserved for Palestinian prisoners”.
Israel’s delegate rebuked the many allegations levelled against his Government, warning of a “dangerous illusion taking hold in this Chamber”.  Diplomacy can never succeed while terrorists are allowed to hold peace hostage, he stressed.  While Israel believes in diplomacy, it will only work when Hamas stops using it as a mechanism to delay its disarmament.  “Gaza cannot be rebuilt only with cement and electricity”, but also requires dramatically reformed education and cultural systems that finally promote peace, he added.