Anticipatory Action and 
Risk Mitigation of Food-
Insecurity in Eastern 
DRC
January 2023 to May 2026
Key findings
• Insecurity Insight data, obtained through continuous open-source monitoring of incidents 
of conflict-related violence, providing an overview of reported damage and destruction 
to local food systems, indicating areas with growing strain on food production and 
distribution. 
• Food-related violence was geographically concentrated, with the vast majority occurring 
in North Kivu (55%) and Ituri (37%), which together accounted for 92% of all recorded 
incidents.
• Local and sustainable food systems, as well as humanitarian aid, have repeatedly been 
subjected to a variety of conflict violence, the impacts of which compound over time and 
continue to undermine food security in eastern DRC today.
• 61% of incidents involved attacks on people carrying out food-related activities, including 
farmers working in agricultural fields, humanitarian workers delivering food assistance, 
and marketgoers.
• 25% of incidents involved the looting of livestock or the killing and injuring of livestock.
• Persistent informal taxation and financial extortion by armed actors, including FARDC, 
Wazalendo, M23, Mayi Mayi militia, and ADF, contributed to putting a strain on food 
systems. This practice often involved the erection of checkpoints and farmers’ access 
to agricultural land being restricted in Ituri and North Kivu provinces and was often 
accompanied by other forms of violence and intimidation.
Anticipatory Action and Risk Mitigation of Food-Insecurity in Eastern DRC January 2023 to May 2026
2
Introduction
From January 2023 to May 2026, Insecurity Insight recorded 465 incidents of food-related 
violence across eastern DRC, underlining a continuation of persistent and repeated violence 
against local food systems in North Kivu and Ituri in particular. This includes 175 identified 
incidents in 2023, 108 in 2024 and 136 in 2025. The cumulative pattern of incidents observed 
over the period highlights the sustained disruption of local food systems and livelihoods in 
these areas, driving increased reliance on humanitarian food-aid which is underfunded and 
also affected by violence and insecurity. 
These challenges are exacerbated by the ongoing and reverberating consequences of 
incidents of food-related violence. In many cases, one recorded incident represents an 
ongoing and pervasive issue that, while not recorded at every iteration, will continue to 
erode the food system over time. For example, in May 2026, armed members of the Allied 
Democratic Forces (ADF) reportedly looted livestock in Mambasa, Ituri province, and 
demanded a monthly payment of 30,000 Congolese Francs from farmers to access their 
agricultural fields.1 This type of illegal taxation and extortion through violence and intimidation 
can affect multiple farmers in the area over an extended period of time. 
In addition, the impact of food-related violence can take weeks, months or even years to 
fully manifest. In February 2025, for example, a farmer in Beni, North Kivu, was killed by a 
previously laid landmine2, illustrating the often delayed impact that one act of violence can 
have on livelihoods and the safety of those working within the local food system. Similarly, 
the displacement of farmers from Beni in August 2025 3 will ultimately reduce agricultural 
production as fields were left untended and harvests were disrupted, with consequences for 
food production and availability. When multiple farmers are displaced on an ongoing basis, 
incidents from the past continue to impact the food security of the present and future.
The result of these observations is that, even as incident numbers decrease, the full impact 
and reverberating effects of violent events can take weeks, months, or even years to be 
realised. This necessitates the implementation of the anticipatory mindset approach outlined 
below.
Adopting an Anticipatory Mindset
In conflict, monitoring patterns of damage and destruction can help to anticipate the 
predictable devastating needs in order to identify the mitigating measures that prevent the 
impact spreading and turning into devastating consequences. The anticipatory mindset is 
a specific form of anticipatory action to address the impacts of conflict, centred on the idea 
of proactivity informed by an analysis of available evidence and consideration of expected 
scenarios.4 It also advocates for a flexible and context-sensitive approach, such as flexible 
funding, rather than a response involving rigid structures. The key aim is to extensively 
analyse and continuously monitor and understand the threats to aid operations and food 
systems in order, as far as possible, to take proactive or early action to reduce the devastating 
impact that often follows conflict-violence, prevent its worst consequences and to sustain 
livelihoods and prevent food insecurity, avoidable deaths and displacement. While the most 
affected provinces, such as North Kivu and Ituri in this analysis, require urgent and immediate 
prioritisation to mitigate suffering and meet humanitarian needs, harm can be mitigated by 
applying the anticipatory mindset to all provinces across the DRC.
Anticipatory Action and Risk Mitigation of Food-Insecurity in Eastern DRC January 2023 to May 2026
3
The anticipatory mindset includes:
• Understanding the level of destruction of the local food system and how it affects food 
needs in the short, medium and long-term.
• Understanding how narratives affect aid acceptance and adjusting access and security 
risk management strategies accordingly.
• Developing the capacity to link information on the impact of the conduct of hostilities to 
the needs assessments.
• Developing the capacity to assess acceptance in a polarised and changing context.
• Developing the capacity to support local partners, and volunteers, in their security risk 
management.
• Developing the capacity to act and implement action based on predicted changes at 
short notice.
• Developing the capacity to mitigate the immediate damage to local systems to strengthen 
resilience, including through adapted mental health support.
• Developing the capacity to advocate for the respect of International Humanitarian Law 
(IHL) in conflict to ensure the protection of food systems, health care and aid workers.
Patterns of violence, January 2023-May 2026
In support of the implementation of an anticipatory mindset approach to addressing food 
insecurity in eastern DRC, Insecurity Insight has identified and geo-located the most 
prominent forms of violence documented from January 2023-May 2026. These include 285 
incidents of attacks on people carrying out food-related activities, over half of which were 
observed in North Kivu province (156 incidents) and 115 incidents of the looting, killing or 
injuring of livestock, also most prominently observed in North Kivu province (51 incidents).
Attacks against people engaged in food-related activities were the most frequently 
recorded form of violence recorded during the monitoring period, with at least 285 incidents 
documented. Although the number of incidents has declined steadily over time, from 117 in 
2023, to 83 in 2024, to 67 in 2025, and 18 in the first half of 2026, this trend should not be 
interpreted as a proportional improvement in food security outcomes.
The legacy of repeated violence continues to undermine food systems long after individual 
incidents occur. Communities affected by attacks face enduring trauma, displacement, 
restricted access to agricultural land and markets, and significant material and financial 
losses. These cumulative impacts undermine the food system at all levels, from production, 
transportation, purchase, sale, consumption and humanitarian access. As a result, even 
as incident numbers fall, the consequences of past and ongoing violence continue to 
constrain recovery and threaten the resilience of affected communities. A comprehensive 
understanding of these events over time helps to build a more robust understanding of how 
food insecurity was created and how it may be addressed and prevented in the future.
Anticipatory Action and Risk Mitigation of Food-Insecurity in Eastern DRC January 2023 to May 2026
4
Anticipatory Action and Risk Mitigation of Food-Insecurity in Eastern DRC January 2023 to May 2026
5
In addition to attacks on people carrying out food-related activities and the looting killing or 
injuring of livestock, analysis revealed incidents of the ongoing threat of persistent illegal 
taxation and financial extortion by armed actors, including FARDC, Wazalendo, M23, 
Mayi Mayi militia, and ADF, which often involved the erection of checkpoints and farmers’ 
access to agricultural land being restricted in Ituri and North Kivu provinces and was often 
accompanied by other forms of violence and intimidation, indicating the systematic difficulties 
in food production and distribution.
Anticipatory Action and Risk Mitigation of Food-Insecurity in Eastern DRC January 2023 to May 2026
6
Other resources
For detailed recommendations on conflict and hunger in the DRC, definitions of data 
categories and the methodology, see Insecurity Insight’s in-depth report: Chronic Insecurity: 
How Armed Groups Undermine Food Security in Ituri and North Kivu Provinces (February 
2025).
Anticipatory action (AA) involves “acting ahead of predicted hazardous events to prevent 
or reduce acute humanitarian impacts before they fully unfold.” Insecurity Insight’s An 
Anticipatory Mindset  explores how humanitarian organisations can move from reacting 
to crises to preparing for them before they unfold. Drawing on lessons from security risk 
management and community engagement, the report highlights how proactive analysis, 
conflict-sensitive planning, and smarter use of data can help aid agencies maintain access, 
protect staff, and deliver more effective support in conflict-affected settings. It makes the 
case for embedding anticipatory thinking across humanitarian programming to reduce harm, 
strengthen resilience, and improve outcomes for vulnerable communities. 
How the Conduct of Conflict Affects Food Security and Health Care in Sudan examines 
how the methods and tactics used in Sudan’s war are driving hunger, undermining health 
care, and deepening the humanitarian crisis. Drawing on evidence of attacks on hospitals, 
food systems, markets, aid operations, and civilian infrastructure, the report highlights the 
interconnected impacts of conflict on people’s ability to access food and essential medical 
services. It offers recommendations to strengthen civilian protection and safeguard critical 
systems that communities depend on for survival during conflict.
More reports and guidance materials are available on our website. 
End notes
1 FIVC DRC (linked to Anticipatory Action and Risk Mitigation of Food-Insecurity). Incident 
number 132506.
2 FIVC DRC (linked to Anticipatory Action and Risk Mitigation of Food-Insecurity). Incident 
number 93983
3 FIVC DRC (linked to Anticipatory Action and Risk Mitigation of Food-Insecurity). Incident 
number 117815
4 For further information, see: https://bit.ly/AAMindsetOct2024
This document is published by Insecurity Insight, a Humanitarian to Humanitarian 
(H2H) organisation committed to the Humanitarian Principles. The analysis is 
based on Insecurity Insight’s Food Insecurity and Violent Conflict (FIVC) dataset, an 
event-based dataset compiled by Insecurity Insight from open sources and partner 
contributions, and available for download on the Humanitarian Data Exchange 
(HDX).
This document is funded by the European Commission through the ‘Hunger and 
Conflict: protecting people in armed conflict and related settings from food insecurity, 
promoting IHL compliance’. The contents are the responsibility of Insecurity Insight. 
Suggested citation: Insecurity Insight. June 2026. Anticipatory Action and Risk 
Mitigation of Food-Insecurity in Eastern DRC January 2023 to May 2026. Switzerland: 
Insecurity Insight. https://bit.ly/DRCFoodJun2026