1 
 
 
SUDAN SITUATION 
 
March 2026 
 
 
Sudanese refugee Awati displays the ingredients she has sourced to begin producing traditional Sudanese perfumes in Adré, eastern 
Chad. © UNHCR/ Levon Sevunts 
 
 
Highlights 
 
▪ Sudan: Armed clashes intensified in the Darfur and Kordofan States, marked by ground fighting, 
artillery fire, and drone strike and reports of criminal activity, intercommunal violence, and increased 
tensions near the Tina crossing along the Chad –Sudan border. In  the Kordofan States, fighting 
escalated further along the Dilling, Abu Jubaiha, and Al Rahad towns, with attacks on vehicles along 
key routes disrupting movement and supply lines, heightening risks for civilians. On 31 March, the 
Government of Sudan annou nced an extension of the Adre humanitarian corridor from 1 April to 30 
June 2026, a cross-border route facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance from Chad into 
Darfur and supporting limited movement of aid supplies and personnel into affected areas.  
 
▪ Central African Republic (CAR): Despite relative calm in Birao, the security situation across Vakaga 
remains fragile and volatile. Robbery, extortion, and looting were reported along the Ouanda -Djallé, 
Sikikédé–Mangagne, and Tissi –Sarayevo roads, underscoring the continued exposure of ci vilians to 
armed actors on key transit routes. Incidents of intercommunal violence were also recorded, reflecting 
a persistently concerning security and protection environment across the prefecture.  
 
▪ Chad: Ouaddaï Province continued to face a fragile and deteriorating public health situation. A deadly 
meningitis outbreak, ongoing measles transmission, and heightened outbreak risks posed serious 
threats to population health and had the potential to constrain planned large-scale refugee relocations 
if not urgently contained. 
 
▪ Egypt: On 11 March, representatives from the embassies of France, the European Union, Poland, 
and Switzerland visited UNHCR’s Reception Centre where they observed how refugees access 
registration and protection services. The delegation received an overview of UNHCR’s processes and 
           
                              
 EXTERNAL UPDATE #117
2 
 
witnessed frontline reception activities aimed at ensuring refugees and asylum‑seekers receive timely 
documentation and support. 
 
▪ Libya: Following the technical consultations held in February 2026 between UN agencies and relevant 
Libyan government ministry counterparts, the virtual launch of the 2026 Sudan Refugee Response 
Plan (RRP) – Libya Chapter took place 16 March 2026 . The launch featured high -level interventions 
from the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary -General (DSRSG), the UNHCR Regional 
Refugee Coordinator for the Sudan Situation, the UNHCR Representative in Sudan, and the Head of 
the Department for International Organizations at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  The Response Plan, 
involving 14 UN agencies and international NGOs, aims to assist 667,000 people comprising 596,000 
refugees, 1,000 third country nationals, and 70,000 host community members, with a projected budget 
of US$115.5 million. Multi-sectoral assistance, focusing on protection, basic services, and resilience 
support, seeks to provide nearly 200,000 people with protection services, over 221,000 people with 
food assistance, 180,000 people with essential items and support 398,000 in dividual health 
consultations. 
 
▪ South Sudan: The Norwegian Minister of Foreign Affairs visited Renk, with engagements spanning 
from the Joda border crossing, the Abukadra returnee settlement site, and to the Renk Transit Centre. 
The Minister engaged directly with newly arrived families in Abukadra, as well as refugees, returnees, 
and third-country nationals at the transit centre, commending the strong coordination and efforts of 
partners in addressing the nee ds of new arrivals. The delegation expressed appreciation to partners 
at every stage of the visit and requested that gratitude be extended to the County Commissioner for 
his efforts in facilitating returnee settlement in Abukadra. During one -on-one briefings, the delegation 
raised questions on the security situation, funding challenges , protection risks, priority needs, and 
ongoing collaboration with government authorities. 
 
▪ Uganda: The security situation in Kiryandongo Settlement, home to the largest population of 
Sudanese refugees, continued to deteriorate, driven by economic hardship and underlying ethnic 
tensions, with UNHCR and partners scaling up community -based protection, conflict mitigation 
initiatives, and livelihood support to ease tensions and enhance social cohesion.
3 
 
Situation and Operational Response 
 
SUDAN 
 
Highlights 
▪ The security situation in Blue Nile State deteriorated significantly during March. Following 
intensified hostilities in Kurmuk and Giessan localities, Kurmuk town and Muqja in Bau locality 
were captured by Rapid Support Forces (RSF) and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement –
North (SPLM-N) joint forces on 24 and 26 March respectively, triggering large scale displacement 
of tens of thousands  primarily to Ed Damazine and other locations within Blue Nile.  Damazine 
remained under government control; however, insecurity and access constraints continued to 
disrupt humanitarian operations and increase pressure on services. 
▪ The security situation in Khartoum, Northern, and Red Sea States remained generally calm; 
however, the operational context continued to be complex. The influx of returnees has placed 
pressure on already weakened basic services, while worsening economic conditions, including 
fuel shortages and rising prices, affected transportation and access to services, heightening 
protection risks. In Red Sea State, authorities indicated plans  to relocate displaced persons to Al 
Hishan site, with preparatory activities un derway for approximately 3,000 households. UNHCR 
engaged with the authorities to promote planning and coordination with relevant actors to ensure 
that any movements are safe, orderly, and dignified, and that site management decisions follow 
agreed guidance and safeguard affected households. 
▪ Gedaref and Kassala States remained relatively stable, with no disruptions to operations and no 
reported refugee arrivals despite insecurity near the Sudan –Ethiopia border. In Kassala, 
authorities indicated plans to close Al Karama IDP site; however, timel ines and relocation 
arrangements remain unclear, raising concerns about potential secondary displacement. 
Humanitarian actors’ engagement with authorities continued to promote adherence to established 
guidance and safeguards for affected households. 
▪ The security situation in White Nile State remained generally stable during the reporting period, 
with no incidents directly affecting humanitarian operations or facilities. The state continued to be 
affected by spillover from hostilities in North and Sout h Kordofan, including increased UAV and 
drone activity. Reported strikes affected civilian infrastructure in Kosti, Rabak and Al Jabalain 
towns. Continued clashes along the Kadugli –Dilling axis in South Kordofan and the El Obeid 
corridor in North Kordofan drove displacement into White Nile, with arrivals mainly recorded in 
Kosti and Rabak, adding pressure on basic services. 
 
Population Movements and Registration 
Between 1 and 29 March, authorities reported that approximately 21,600 Sudanese returnees entered 
Sudan through the Argeen and Ashkeet border crossings in Northern State, compared to 30,000 returnees 
at the end of February 2026.  
In March, around 2,500 refugees and asylum-seekers arrived in Sudan, mainly from South Sudan, Eritrea 
and Ethiopia. These refugees and asylum -seekers are hosted in White Nile, Kassala, Gedaref and Blue 
Nile States. 
Protection 
In Northern State, UNHCR and partners conducted protection monitoring at Argeen and Ashkeet border 
points among returnees. Key concerns included family separation, confiscation of documents, and limited 
access to food, shelter, health care, and psychosocial support. 
 
Household-level protection monitoring among IDPs and returnees identified priority needs related to food 
assistance, non -food items, and access to essential services  in Khartoum State. Urgent cases were 
referred to partners for follow-up support. 
 
Protection partners carried out monitoring through key informant interviews and community -based 
mechanisms in camps and gathering sites, reaching over 500 individuals  in East and South Darfur . 
Reported concerns included access to food, health care, WASH, livelihoods, and safety; findings informed 
response planning. 
 
In March, the protection hotline in North Darfur received 72 calls from IDPs, refugees, and host community 
members seeking information and reporting insecurity and limited access to basic services. Women
4 
 
reported incidents of sexual violence and were referred to partners for specialised support services. In 
Gedaref State, protection hotlines received 18 calls, and 12 individuals accessed urban counselling 
services. Door-to-door monitoring provided direct support to 61 forcibly displaced people on shelter, legal 
issues, documentation, and psychosocial care. In Um Gargour, Um Rakuba, and Babikri refugee camps, 
over 200 forcibly displaced people participated in three Accountability to Affected Population s (AAP) 
meetings raising concerns on services and living conditions, which were shared with partners for follow -
up.  In Blue Nile State, five monitoring visits were conducted in Camp 6. While no major incidents were 
reported, refugees raised concerns about the p resence of armed personnel at night, affecting safety and 
the civilian character of the site. UNHCR is continuing its advocacy with authorities to maintain the civilian 
character of the camps. 
 
UNHCR in coordination with the Commission of Refugees (COR) in Gedaref State, supported 22 refugees 
and asylum-seekers apprehended due to lack of documentation to return to camps, preventing deportation 
and ensuring access to protection. 
 
Child Protection 
UNHCR partners conducted Best Interest Assessments (BIAs) for 12 refugee children identified in Gedaref 
State.  Another 20 child protection cases were identified and referred to specialized service providers for 
support.  In Um Rakuba refugee camp, Gedaref State, a child was reunified with family members in close 
coordination with partners.  
 
In Kassala State, awareness sessions on child protection, exploitation, hygiene and first aid were delivered 
in Shagarab and Kilo 26 refugee camps using interactive drama and puppet theatre. Psychological First 
Aid was provided to 30 children in Wad Sharif i refugee camp, while over 75 children in Kilo 26 refugee 
camp participated in child rights and protection sessions. Case workers conducted four home visits 
supporting eight children with food and non-food items.  
 
UNHCR’s partner in East Darfur State conducted 13 home visits in El Ferdous and Kario refugee camps 
to monitor unaccompanied and separated children and their caregivers, reaching some 70 children. 
Identified needs included clothing, access to education, and improved shelter conditions, as reported by 
caregivers. In addition, nine group psychosocial support and recreational sessions reached over 300 
children through structured activities promoting wellbeing and safe social interaction.  
 
UNHCR’s partner delivered three child protection and gender -based violence awareness sessions for 
some 360 refugees in Camp 6, Blue Nile State, and an  additional 12 sessions for over 400 IDPs. 
Child-Friendly Spaces in the Al Karama gathering sites continued providing psychosocial support and 
recreational activities to over 730 children. 
 
In White Nile State, 11 children at risk were identified in Al Alagaya and Um Sangour refugee camps who 
received appropriate support from UNHCR’s partner. 
 
GBV Prevention and Response 
GBV awareness activities were held in Shagarab refugee camp in Kassala State to mark International 
Women’s Day using interactive drama and dialogue sessions with women, men, girls and boys. 
Discussions focused on harmful practices including female genital mutilation and child marriage. 
 
11 GBV incidents were identified across Shagarab, Wad Sharifi and Griba camps in Kassala State, 
involving sexual violence, physical assault, kidnapping with assault and psychological violence. Survivors 
received Psychological First Aid and were referred to medical and psychosocial services. 
 
Women’s and adolescent girls’ groups facilitated seven dialogue sessions in Wad Sharifi and Shagarab 
refugee camps in Kassala State on risks such as bullying, physical abuse and child marriage reaching 
close to 120 participants. Thirteen additional awarene ss sessions across the camps reached some 200 
refugees and host communities on GBV prevention, sexual exploitation, early marriage, cyberbullying, 
hygiene and psychosocial wellbeing. 
 
A three -day capacity -building workshop for 18 Community -Based Protection Network members was 
conducted in Al Sulaimaniya in Jabal Awlia locality in Khartoum State, covering protection, GBV prevention 
and Psychological First Aid.
5 
 
UNHCR’s partner provided psychosocial support and referred survivors for medical care in 15 identified 
cases of GBV in Kario camp and El Ferdous refugee settlement in East Darfur. In North Darfur State, 
UNHCR’s partner reported 11 SGBV cases. Survivors were referred by the partner to medical facilities for 
treatment and received psychosocial support to address immediate protection and mental health needs.  
 
UNHCR’s partner identified one GBV case at Al Karama 1 IDP site in Blue Nile State; the survivor received 
psychosocial support, medical care, and further referrals to partners for additional specialised support. In 
White Nile State, UNHCR’s partner identified nine GBV incidents across camps involving female and male 
survivors and provided survivors with legal assistance, medical support, and dignity kits.  
 
With support from UNHCR, Gadah Charity, a forcibly displaced persons -led organization, commenced 
protection activities in Dereig IDP camp, South Darfur. In addition, UNHCR delivered three -day capacity-
building sessions for 15 staff on  protection from sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA), safeguarding, 
reporting mechanisms, financial management, and project implementation.  
 
Community-based protection 
Multi-purpose community centres (MPCC) 
More than 15,200 refugees, asylum -seekers and IDPs accessed protection services and activities at 
UNHCR-supported MPCCs in North, East, South, West and Central Darfur States and West Kordofan 
States in March. Services included protection counselling, refer rals through protection desks, group and 
individual psychosocial support, GBV and sexual violence awareness sessions, recreational activities, and 
community-led initiatives. 
 
UNHCR’s partner equipped two MPCCs in Otash and Beleil localities in South Darfur with solar power 
systems to improve operational capacity and ensure continuity of protection services.  
 
In Red Sea and Khartoum States, more than 800 refugees, IDPs and host community members accessed 
protection services at UNHCR -supported MPCCs. Services included protection counselling, 
documentation support, referrals to specialized health and protection services, psychosocial support, cash 
assistance through community -based mechanisms, food assistance for vulnerable cases, awareness 
sessions on psychosocial well-being and social issues, and recreational activities for children. 
 
UNHCR’s partner reached over 4,000 refugees, IDPs, and host community members through protection 
and psychosocial activities at MPCCs in White Nile State. Services provided included awareness sessions 
on protection risks and available services, group and individual psychosocial support, life -skills and 
recreational activities for youth, PSEA training, and community engagement activities such as meetings 
and community -led initiatives, strengthening wellbeing and community participation in protection 
mechanisms. 
 
Community-based Protection Networks (CBPNs) 
In Kassala State, UNHCR-supported CBPNs, identified over 50 refugees with specific protection concerns 
and referred them for specialised assistance provided by UNHCR’s partner.  Cases primarily involved 
persons with disabilities, elderly persons at risk, women at risk, indi viduals with medical concerns and 
GBV survivors. Identified individuals received referrals for services including food support, NFIs, clothing 
and hygiene items, based on assessed needs. Refresher training courses for CBPN members in Kilo  26, 
Al Girba and Aboda towns, Kassala State focused on case identification, documentation, reporting and 
safe referral pathways.  
 
Health and Nutrition 
Health facilities in Gedaref State provided over 6,000 outpatients consultations during the reporting period, 
with the most common illnesses recorded being acute respiratory infections, malaria, diarrhoeal diseases, 
and skin infections. Five cases required referral to secondary care at state hospitals. Disease surveillance 
continued, including monitoring of suspected chickenpox cases in Um Rakuba refugee camp. Health 
partners reached over 10,000 forcibly displaced people through household visits and awareness sessions 
focusing on disease prevention and health promotion. 
 
Measles cases were treated at camp -level health facilities in White Nile State including seven refugee 
cases and one host community case with no deaths recorded.  Mortality surveillance recorded 28 refugee 
deaths in White Nile State in March, compared to 3 4 in February 2026. Of these, six were children under
6 
 
five, including three neonatal deaths. Health facilities in White Nile refugee camps provided 25,502 
outpatient consultations in March (62 per cent refugees; 38 per cent host community/IDPs), representing 
a 13 per cent decrease compared to February. 
 
Shelter and non-food items (NFIs) 
In Gedaref State, UNHCR and its partner supported vulnerable refugee households across Um Rakuba, 
Babikri, and Tunaydbah refugee camps through a combination of shelter rehabilitation and non -food item 
assistance. Thirteen households received core relief items and 24 received emergency shelter kits (ESKs) 
consisting of plastic sheeting and basic construction materials to reinforce or establish temporary shelters. 
Additionally, 37 traditional shelters (tukuls) were repaired, improving safety and living condit ions, while 
CRI kits were distributed to 15 households affected by fire incidents in Tunaydbah and Um Rakuba. ESKs 
were further distributed to 15 households in Tunaydbah and five households in Um Rakuba, helping 
families address immediate shelter needs and improve their overall living conditions. 
 
UNHCR and partners distributed some 1,000 NFI kits in Al Karama 3 and 4 IDP sites in Damazine locality, 
Blue Nile while close to 460 NFI kits were distributed to newly arrived households who fled from Kordofan 
States to Goz Al -Salam IDP site in Kosti local ity In White Nile State. Each kit comprises plastic sheets, 
jerry cans, blankets, sleeping mats, a solar lamp and a kitchen set. 
 
Water, Health, and Sanitation (WASH) 
In Gedaref State, refugees and asylum -seekers received an average of 26 litres of water per person per 
day across the four refugee camps, exceeding minimum daily supply standards. In addition, around 160 
water taps were replaced in Um Rakuba, Babikri, and Um Gargour camps, improving access to safe water 
and reducing service interruptions. 
WASH partners ensured access to safe drinking water for over 500,000 refugees and host community 
members in White Nile and Blue Nile States. UNHCR’s partner constructed 10 communal latrines and 
desludged 50 non -functional units to improve sanitation servic es and support community -level 
maintenance. In Blue Nile State, UNHCR’s partner restored sanitation services for approximately 5,000 
refugees through the desludging of 50 latrines. 
 
Livelihoods 
In White Nile State, UNHCR’s partner supported 400 IDPs, refugees, and host community members in 
Um Sangour and Khor Al Waral refugee camps through Village Savings and Loan Associations to access 
small loans for household needs and income -generating activi ties. In addition, 10 fishing groups 
comprising 50 forcibly displaced people were established in the same locations and provided with fishing 
materials, including nets, cooling boxes, hooks, paddles, and fishing sticks, to strengthen productivity and 
support sustainable household income. 
 
 
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC (CAR)  
 
Highlights 
▪ UNHCR and its partners conducted a rapid needs assessment for newly arrived Sudanese 
refugees in Ouanda -Djallé and Sikikédé in the Vakaga prefecture. In Ouanda -Djallé, 243 
households comprising 787 individuals were identified and registered at Level 1 as n ew refugees 
and received essential items. In Sikikédé and Manou, UNHCR distributed essential items including 
tarpaulins, jerrycans, mats, buckets, and blankets to 129 refugees. 
▪ Registration and biometric enrolment missions were conducted by the National Commission for 
Refugees (CNR), UNHCR and partners in Manou and Sikikédé, in Vakaga Prefecture, as well as 
in Mboki, in Haut-Mbomou Prefecture. These missions enabled the registration of nearly 855 
newly arrived Sudanese refugees, comprising 211 households, and the issuance of identity 
documents to facilitate their freedom of movement. 
Population Movement and Registration  
As of 31 March,  CAR hosted nearly 42,000 Sudanese refugees from around 13,100 households, 
representing an 11 per cent decrease (nearly 5,200 refugees) compared with 47,000 registered individuals 
as of 15 December 2025. This decrease is mainly due to the physical verification  exercise conducted by 
the Government and UNHCR in Korsi, following observations of spontaneous departures and prolonged 
absences over a given period.
7 
 
Protection  
UNHCR and its partner partner Comité International pour l'Aide d'Urgence et le Développement  (CIAUD) 
conducted 44 protection monitoring visits in Vakaga prefecture, in Birao mainly in Korsi, Matala, Am 
Dafock, Delembe, Ouandja, Sérégo, Koumbal 1, Kpougou and Ouanda-Djallé.  
 
These monitoring activities enabled the documentation of 106 protection incidents, with violations of 
property rights remaining the most prevalent, particularly extortion and illegal taxation, followed by physical 
assaults, violations of the right to freedom, and one incident involving loss of life. 
 
Most incidents were attributed to state actors and allies, and non -state armed groups, highlighting 
continuing insecurity affecting refugees and host communities. Geographically, the incidents were 
concentrated in Ouanda -Djallé, Birao, Am -Dafock, and Ouand ja-Kotto, reflecting persistent protection 
risks across key areas of Vakaga prefecture. These protection incidents affected both refugees and host 
community members, with adult men constituting most victims due to their mobility while seeking 
livelihoods. 
 
To mitigate and respond to protection -related risks and incidents, UNHCR and partners strengthened 
monitoring, referral, and advocacy, while reiterating the need to reinforce GBV and child protection 
services and further support community-based protection structures to enhance prevention and response 
mechanisms. 
 
Prevention and response to GBV 
UNHCR and CIAUD strengthened the prevention and response to violence against women and girls in the 
Vakaga and Haute -Kotto prefecture, where reported incidents included physical assault, psychological 
violence, and denial of resources. Many incidents occurred in domestic settings. All survivors received 
psychosocial support in safe spaces. 
 
CIAUD also conducted community-based awareness-raising on causes, harmful norms, risks, prevention 
and reporting mechanisms of gender -based violence. Strengthening the engagement of men and boys 
remains critical to promoting a more inclusive and sustainable community -based approach to preventing 
sexual violence. 
 
CIAUD also continued awareness-raising activities in Bamingui -Bangoran, Vakaga and Haute -Kotto 
prefectures on the prevention and impact of GBV and women’s rights reaching 600 people amongst the 
refugees, host communities and IDP. At the end of these activities, participants demonstrated increased 
awareness of harmful cultural norms and behaviors that constitute risk factors for gender-based violence.  
 
Accountability to the affected population (AAP)  
UNHCR and CIAUD, continued to reinforce accountability to affected populations in Korsi through ongoing 
feedback collection, referrals, awareness -raising, and follow-up on complaints. The team collected 1858 
complaints, mainly related to assistance cards a nd discrepancies in household sizes. These complaints 
directly referred to existing response mechanisms to provide feedback to the complainants.  
 
In addition, four community outreach awareness sessions were conducted by the complaints management 
committees in the Korsi neighborhood, reaching 479 people. 
 
Child protection  
UNHCR and partners continued child protection activities in Korsi, focusing on promoting children’s rights, 
psychosocial well-being, and social cohesion. The participation gap between girls and boys underscores 
the need to strengthen community outreach and awareness efforts to encourage more balanced 
engagement, while addressing sociocultural barriers and domestic responsibilities that may limit girls’ 
participation. 
 
Identified needs and gaps to address include strengthening the presence of child protection actors in Birao 
through holistic service packages, improving coordination of child protection case management with the 
involvement of available decentralized state services, and constructing semi -durable Child -Friendly 
Spaces rather than easily vandalized or degradable local materials.
8 
 
Education 
UNHCR and its partner  Centre de Support en Santé Internationale  (CSSI), in collaboration with the 
Academic Inspectorate of the Vakaga prefecture, continued supporting refugees’ integration into the 
national education system. During the reporting period, 132 people participated in French language 
courses, including 91 refugees and 41 host community members. This activity aims to prepare Sudanese 
refugee students to integrate into the Central African education system, where lessons are delivered in 
French.  
Shelter and Non-Food Items (NFIs) 
The construction of semi-durable shelters for people with specific needs is ongoing in Korsi. To date, 150 
shelters have been completed, providing vulnerable households with safe and dignified living conditions.  
In March, UNHCR also completed the construction of the health centre in Korsi, improving access to 
healthcare for residents of Birao. Assessment missions in hosting areas outside of Korsi (Sikikédé, Sam -
Ouandja and Ouandja-Djalle) identified important needs in term of sustainable housing for new refugees, 
especially for vulnerable people with specific needs. 
 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH)   
To improve access to household sanitation, UNHCR’s partner NOURRIR initiated the construction of 80 
semi-durable family latrines, of which 75 have been completed. This intervention aims to improve 
sanitation conditions, reduce open defecation, and mitigate the risk of waterborne diseases in the context 
of displacement. 
 
In addition, NOURRIR's hygiene promotion activities reached around 6,000 people in Korsi. These 
activities included focus group discussions, cleaning of communal spaces and door -to-door awareness-
raising on safe water management, latrine use, waste disposa l, and environmental hygiene, aiming to 
improve public health conditions. 
 
Assessment of missions and regular engagement with displaced and host communities highlight the 
ongoing needs for access to safe and clean water in rural areas hosting displaced population.  
Health and Nutrition 
Medical teams from the CSSI and the International Medical Corps (IMC), coordinated by the Vakaga health 
district, continued to provide medical consultations for refugees and host communities in Birao.  
 
In March, CSSI and IMC provided consultations to 1,018 people, including 835 refugees and 183 members 
of the local population. Children aged 0 to 59 months accounted for 315 of the totals. During the reporting 
period, 64 women affected by forced displacement benefited from antenatal care services. 
 
UNHCR and CIAUD, conducted outreach sessions for 100 members of village savings and loans 
associations (50 women and 50 men) as part of a livelihoods project. The sessions focused on member 
engagement, timely contributions, and women’s leadership, aiming t o strengthen socioeconomic 
empowerment. 
 
 
CHAD 
Highlights 
▪ In March, security along the Chad –Sudan border deteriorated sharply, with eastern Chad 
experiencing sustained cross-border spillover from the Sudan conflict. A series of drone strikes—
including in Adikong (12 March), North Darfur (16 March), and Tina/Tiné o n both sides of the 
border (18 March) —further undermined the security environment, causing casualties among 
Chadian civilians and Sudanese refugees and damaging critical infrastructure. In response, on 22 
March, the Government of Chad reinforced border clo sure measures by deploying additional 
forces, placing them on maximum alert, and maintaining the closure of the border, while 
authorizing immediate retaliation against attacks originating from Sudan; however, the border 
remained open for humanitarian opera tions and cross -border assistance, including asylum -
seekers. 
▪ This response was complemented by a high -level government mission aimed at easing tensions 
and preventing further escalation. By end of April, these measures had yielded positive results ; 
no further security incidents have been reported since 18 March, military presence has been
9 
 
gradually reduced since 26 March, and overall tension levels have noticeably eased, indicating a 
return to a more stable and predictable security environment. 
 
Population Movements and Registration 
Despite border closure measures, cross -border population movements into Chad continued in March, 
albeit at significantly reduced levels. A total of 2,221 individuals crossed into Chad in March, compared to 
5,915 in February and 12,981 in January. This sharp decline is attributed to the intensified military 
presence and security operations at border points, as well as reduced population movement during the 
holy month of Ramadan. 
 
Since January 2026, Chad has received 15,557 newly arrived refugees from 6,264 households, bringing 
the cumulative total registered since the attack on El -Fasher in late October 2025 to 35,960 individuals 
(14,328 families). Overall, since April 2023, Chad has recorded a total of 919,200 refugees across 264,246 
households. 
 
Border monitoring activities reveal a clear shift in arrival patterns toward Ennedi Est Province, which 
accounted for 65 per cent of arrivals in March. Displacement continues to be overwhelmingly driven by 
insecurity linked to armed conflict (65 per cent) and persecution (30 per cent), with no preventive flight or 
displacement related to economic factors or access to services recorded during the month. Protection 
risks during displacement intensified, with 79 per cent of households reporting at least one hu man rights 
violation. 
 
As of 23 March, a total of 896,737 refugees had been pre -registered and registered out of the 919,200 
recorded since April 2023. Eighty-six per cent of this population are women and children, of whom 25 per 
cent are women. 
 
Protection monitoring activities were significantly strengthened during the first quarter of 2026. In March, 
1,172 households and 323 key informants were interviewed, with 1,291 protection incidents documented, 
up from 689 in February and 472 in January. This upward trend reflects the expansion of geographic 
coverage, particularly in eastern Chad, and the enhanced deployment of protection monitors and partners. 
 
Relocation  
In March, UNHCR supported the relocation of 1,394 refugees from border areas to the developed sites of 
Oure Cassoni (Ennedi East), Dougui, and Kouchaguine -Moura (Ouaddaï) , a decrease from the 7,464 
individuals relocated in February 2026. Since January 2026, a total of 13,904 refugees were relocated 
from border areas to safer inland sites, where shelter, water, hygiene, and sanitation services have been 
established to ensure dignified living conditions. 
 
The sharp deterioration of the security along the Wadi Fira border has prompted UNHCR, in collaboration 
with the government, partners, and stakeholders, to establish an accelerated relocation plan targeting the 
relocation of over 40,000 refugees from border areas within the next six mon ths. Since April 2023, over 
615,000 refugees have been relocated from border entry points to safer inland sites, where they are better 
protected and have access to assistance. 
 
Protection 
GBV prevention and response    
GBV partners continued delivering a comprehensive multisectoral response for survivors during the 
reporting period, including psychosocial support, case management, and referrals to health, legal, 
protection, and security services. Reported incidents compr ised primarily psychological violence (47  per 
cent), physical assault (29 per cent), rape (11 per cent), forced marriage (6 per cent), denial of resources 
(4 per cent ), and sexual assault (3  per cent ). A notable increase in rape cases involving minors was 
recorded, some resulting in unwanted pregnancies, prompting reinforced prevention and community 
awareness activities. 
 
Prevention efforts were strengthened across all sites through community awareness sessions, focus group 
discussions, and educational talks led by community outreach volunteers, refugee committees, and 
partners. Activities focused on the impact of GBV, the importance of reporting rape within 72 hours, and 
strengthening community support mechanisms. A total of 5,835 individuals were reached (3,546 women,
10 
 
42 men, 984 girls, and 363 boys), and 187 community volunteers and GBV committee members received 
training. 
 
International Women's Day was commemorated across all developed sites under the themes "Rights. 
Justice. Action." and "Every Woman Counts," promoting women's and girls' participation and 
empowerment. Risk mitigation measures included the production and distribution of improved cookstoves 
and eco-friendly charcoal, installation of solar streetlights, training of women in cookstove production, and 
the provision of dignity kits and cash assistance to GBV survivors in Adré.  
 
Human Rights Documentation: Amana Wa Salama Project 
Under the Amana Wa Salama project, 72 cases of serious human rights violations were documented, 
committed both prior to displacement from Sudan and during flight into Chad. Cases were recorded across 
multiple locations: 39 in Marassabré, 27 in Goudrane, 6 in Oure Cassoni, and 5 at the Tiné transit site. 
Documented violations included physical violence, collective assaults, and gender -based violence. 
 
Most survivors are women and girls, all of whom received comprehensive response services including 
mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS), medical care, and material assistance. In addition, 270 
individuals comprising both newly identified and previously documented cases received multipurpose cash 
assistance to address urgent protection needs and strengthen coping and recovery mechanisms.  
 
Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) 
From 23 to 26 March, UNHCR conducted a PSEA mission in Iriba, Wadi Fira, combining capacity -
strengthening and coordination efforts. Training sessions delivered in Guéréda, Milé, and Marassabré 
reached 68 humanitarian staff and revealed critical gaps, notab ly the deployment of partner staff without 
prior PSEA training or formal Code of Conduct signatures. The mission recommended reinforced 
community and committee training, regular refresher sessions, and the development of a national PSEA 
policy framework. 
 
On 26 March, UNHCR convened the first regional PSEA Task Force meeting in Iriba, covering Wadi Fira 
and Ennedi Est, to review the national PSEA action plan, Task Force modalities, Ajala reporting updates, 
and Q1 activities. During the monitoring period, 18 complaints were recorded, including three GBV cases 
referred to partners for multi-sectoral assistance. Engaging Men through Accountable Practice (EMAP) 
activities engaged 23 men to strengthen accountability and prevention of violence against women and 
girls. 
 
Child Protection 
In March, child protection partners continued identifying unaccompanied and separated children (UASC) 
and other children at risk across all refugee reception sites in eastern Chad. On 5 March, UNHCR and 
partners — SOSVET, INTERSOS, Jesuit Refugee Service ( JRS), and World Vision conducted a joint 
assessment to inform a multisectoral response to cases of child abandonment and infanticide. Capacity -
building efforts were strengthened through a Best Interests Determination (BID) workshop held on 23 
March in Iriba for 23 representatives from administrative, judicial, security, and social services, focusing 
on national child protection procedures and coordination.  
 
An additional 48 partner staff benefited from MHPSS training covering psychosocial assessment, digital 
data collection, and service coordination, while UNHCR and JRS trained 314 community workers on child 
protection standards, ethics, and case management. 
 
Key achievements during the reporting period included the civil registration of 386 children, multisectoral 
assistance to 471 children at risk, and the completion of 156 Best Interest Assessments (BIAs). Social and 
recreational activities reached 20,574 children (42% girls), and 238 children received material assistance. 
Community awareness activities reached 6,158 people, and one unaccompanied child was successfully 
reunified in Marassabré with the support of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), UNHCR, 
and JRS. 
 
Shelter 
The preparation of emergency shelter infrastructure in eastern Chad is facing critical delays due to 
centralized authorization bottlenecks, posing a direct risk to planned refugee relocation efforts. Despite 
coordination at the provincial level, shelter co nstruction remains hindered by government counterpart
11 
 
procedures requiring clearance from the capital before site access or works can commence. In 
Kouchaguine-Moura and Arkoum (Ouaddaï Province), construction of 2,715 UNHCR -supported 
emergency shelters has yet to begin, despite site validation and delivery of materials. Advocacy is ongoing 
to expedite approvals and decentralize authorization processes to provincial and departmental levels to 
prevent further disruption to life-saving activities. 
 
UNHCR continues to face additional constraints on humanitarian operations linked to obstruction by a 
government counterpart. Shelter construction at the Oure Cassoni site hosting 113,481 refugees (33,078 
households, including 56,740 new arrivals fleeing th e Sudan crisis) , is increasingly undermined by 
recurrent individual land claims that challenge administrative decisions already formally validated by 
competent authorities. These incidents risk a rapid deterioration of living conditions, heightened social and 
security tensions, and erosion of partner and donor confidence. UNHCR has conducted advocacy with 
local authorities to enforce validated decisions, secure humanitarian infrastructure, and prevent further 
obstruction of life-saving activities. 
 
Health and Nutrition 
The epidemiological situation in Ouaddaï Province remains concerning, with multiple outbreaks under 
active surveillance, notably meningitis, measles, and an ongoing risk of poliomyelitis. High morbidity and 
mortality linked to meningitis, combined with measles transmission and population concentration, continue 
to pose significant public health risks and may affect the planning of large-scale refugee relocations. 
 
The meningitis outbreak remains the most serious public health concern in Ouaddaï due to its high 
mortality rate. A total of 101 suspected cases were reported province-wide, including 22 deaths (8 in health 
facilities) and two severe cases currently under observation. In Adré alone, 66 cases have been recorded, 
including four laboratory-confirmed cases. Community-based death reporting remains challenging due to 
sociocultural barriers, though health authorities are working with community relays to strengthen 
surveillance. Response efforts are focused on community sensitization, and WHO has indicated that a 
vaccination campaign is imminent following compl etion of an ongoing risk assessment. Preventive 
measures including vaccination, limiting overcrowded gatherings, and reducing exposure to extreme heat 
have been widely reiterated. Authorities have warned that a worsening outbreak could negatively affect 
forthcoming large-scale refugee relocation plans. 
 
Measles transmission continues in the Adré health district, with 423 suspected cases recorded, including 
11 confirmed. A reactive vaccination campaign was launched on 30 March 2026, preceded by identification 
of vaccination sites, training of response team s, and an advocacy meeting at the Prefecture chaired by 
the Prefect to ensure strong administrative engagement and community mobilization. In parallel, a national 
polio vaccination campaign is planned for 10–12 April 2026, with preparations underway across  Ouaddaï 
health facilities. 
 
Preventive health and WASH activities continue to support outbreak control, with 18,263 people sensitized 
(71 per cent women) through household visits and hygiene sessions. ACTED is desludging communal 
latrines in Dougui, and Plan International has distributed 110 WASH kits in Aboutengué, contributing to 
improved hygiene conditions amid a fragile and rapidly evolving health context. 
 
Cash-based Interventions (CBI) 
Between 13 and 26 March 2026, UNHCR and implementing partners delivered multi -sectoral cash 
assistance totalling XAF 82,775,000 (approximately USD 141,379.70) to 931 individuals and households, 
aimed at strengthening self -reliance, protection, and shelter outcomes for refugees and vulnerable host 
community members. 
 
Under the livelihood component, 144 beneficiaries received XAF 7,200,000 (approximately USD 12,297) 
to support market gardening activities, contributing to improved food security and sustainable income 
generation. In the shelter sector, 517 households benefited from XAF 47,025,000 (approximately USD 
80,318) through the  Cash for Shelter programme. Additionally, 270 individuals received Cash for 
Protection assistance totalling XAF 28,550,000 (approximately USD 48,763) under the Amana Wa Salama 
project across Goudrane, Touloum, Marassabré, and Oure Cassoni, helping to mitigate protection risks 
and meet urgent basic needs.
12 
 
WASH 
Water supply across sites in eastern Chad averaged 12 litres per person per day in March, with improved 
availability recorded in Dougui, Farchana, and Iridimi. Critical shortages persisted in Alacha, Goudrane, 
Kounoungou, and Oure Cassoni, where supply rem ained below 10 litres per person per day. Progress 
was mixed across sites: one of three boreholes was completed in Aboutengué (by MSF), while water 
trucking continued in Iridimi and Goudrane at 460 m³ per day (ACF 200 m³, SI 100 m³, CRT 160 m³), 
complemented by the installation of fiberglass storage tanks. The potable water network extension to 
neighbouring host communities reached 50 per cent completion, though progress was hampered by land-
related disputes. 
 
Sanitation and hygiene conditions showed moderate overall coverage, with an average ratio of 18 people 
per latrine, though significant pressure was observed in Oure Cassoni, Touloum, Amnabak, Goudrane, 
Arkoum, and Goz -Amir. In Kouchaguine -Moura, all 150 ta rgeted households were identified and latrine 
construction reached 25 per cent completion. Hygiene promotion activities reached 54,375 people through 
103 awareness sessions comprising 66 door -to-door visits and 37 mass sessions , driven by strong 
community mobilization. Despite these efforts, overall hygiene promotion coverage remained limited at 5.3 
per cent, underscoring the urgent need to scale up both hygiene promotion and sanitation infrastructure 
development. 
 
Livelihoods and Self-reliance 
In March 2026, agricultural planning was strengthened to support 4,402 households from host and refugee 
communities, each receiving access to one hectare of farmland. Total production from millet, groundnuts, 
and sorghum/sesame is estimated at between 3,80 0 and 4,800 tons, in line with local farming practices 
and the agro-climatic conditions of eastern Chad. 
 
Concurrently, advocacy efforts were intensified to secure safe and reliable access to farmland. In light of 
growing land pressure and coexistence challenges between refugees and host communities, discussions 
were held with local and traditional leaders and  technical services to reduce land -related conflicts and 
support stable, long-term agricultural activities. 
 
 
EGYPT 
Highlights 
▪ In March, UNHCR issued its Year-End Post-Distribution Monitoring report for 2025, assessing the 
impact of multipurpose cash assistance (MPCA) provided to approximately 24,600 refugee and 
asylum-seeker households  in Egypt . All respondents indicated that the cash assistance had 
improved their living conditions and reduced stress, with expenditures primarily directed toward 
food (88 per cent) and rent (84 per cent), followed by healthcare and education. At the same time, 
80 per cent of respondents reported significant recent price increases across essential goods. 
Despite these challenges, satisfaction with the programme was high . 98 per cent of respondents 
felt safe receiving and using the assistance, and nearly all  beneficiaries reported being well -
informed about the programme and aware of available feedback and complaint mechanisms.  
▪ On 4 March, UNHCR signed a General Cooperation Agreement with AXON Plus to expand access 
to affordable health care for refugees registered in Egypt. AXON Plus is a digital platform in Egypt 
run by AXON Healthtech that supports refugees and asylum -seekers by facilitating access to 
information, services, and assistance through integrated case management and referral systems. 
The partnership will enable refugees to obtain cost -effective medical services through the AXON 
Plus digital health platform, linking them to a wide network of private providers nationwide and 
helping reduce financial barriers to essential care. UNHCR noted that the initiative comes a t a 
time of increasing health needs and constrained humanitarian funding, particularly for refugees 
with chronic illnesses or specialized medical conditions. AXON affirmed its commitment to 
inclusive and sustainable health delivery. This collaboration refl ects UNHCR’s broader efforts to 
strengthen resilience and promote inclusion by engaging responsible private -sector partners to 
complement humanitarian assistance and support the well ‑being of forcibly displaced 
communities. 
▪ On 11 March, UNHCR and Egypt’s National Council for Childhood and Motherhood (NCCM) 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding in Cairo to strengthen cooperation in protecting refugee 
and asylum -seeker children. The agreement aims to improve coordination, expand access to
13 
 
national child protection services, and establish clearer referral pathways for children at risk of 
violence, neglect or exploitation. It also includes support for capacity -building and the 
enhancement of case -management systems, as well as greater use of NCCM’s specialized 
services, such as the Child Helpline (16000). The UNHCR Representative and NCCM President 
welcomed the partnership, noting its importance in ensuring timely and equitable protection for 
vulnerable children. 
Population Movements and Registration 
In March 2026, UNHCR Egypt registered around 9,400 new refugees and asylum-seekers, 80 per cent of 
whom were Sudanese nationals. Smaller numbers include other nationalities (19 per cent) and Syrians (1 
per cent). 
 
Since the outbreak of conflict in Sudan in April 2023, UNHCR Egypt has provided registration 
appointments to more than 1,042,300 individuals who fled the country. Of these, over 834,400 people (79 
per cent) have been fully registered to receive protection and assistance. 
 
As of 31 March, the active registered population of refugees and asylum -seekers in Egypt stood at 
1,099,595 individuals, including those who arrived prior to the conflict. Sudanese nationals constitute the 
largest group at 845,957 individuals (77  per cent), with women and girls accounting for 54.5  per cent of 
the total registered population. 
 
Protection 
Community-based protection (CBP) 
In March, 12,512 refugees and asylum -seekers, including new arrivals from Sudan, received information 
on services, assistance, and procedures for reporting fraud and complaints from outreach community 
workers at UNHCR’s Reception Centre in 6th of October C ity, Greater Cairo. In addition, over the same 
period, UNHCR’s partner Terre des hommes (Tdh) provided on -the-spot basic psychosocial support to 
2,687 individuals, out of whom 144 cases were referred for in -depth psycho -social assessment and 
another 89 fas t-tracked for further urgent assistance. Additionally, UNHCR provided counselling to 325 
refugees, including 190 who received in -person counselling, while the rest were assisted through remote 
sessions. 
 
Prevention and Response to Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG):  
On 29 and 30 March, UNHCR held candle ‑making and product‑marketing workshops at Women‑Friendly 
Spaces, both of which saw strong participation from women entrepreneurs and learners developing new 
vocational skills. Participants expressed appreciation for the opportunity to strengthen their 
income‑generation prospects and underscored the need for greater visibility and marketing avenues to 
support the promotion of their products. 
 
On 16 and 1 March, UNHCR’s partner delivered a series of empowerment sessions. The activities focused 
on strengthening women’s confidence, decision ‑making abilities, and financial literacy, including practical 
skills such as budgeting and savings. Participants highlighted the benefits of peer learning and expressed 
high satisfaction with the training sessions, noting the continued  benefit in supporting women’s economic 
and social empowerment, as well as their interest in additional vocational opportunities and community 
spaces to showcase their products. 
 
Legal and physical protection (LPP) 
In March, 848 individuals received legal counselling sessions through UNHCR and partners, concerning 
early and late birth registration, filing legal reports, divorce, custody, and legal representation. Additionally, 
UNHCR provided LPP case management for 165 refugees. 
 
Infoline 
In March, UNHCR Egypt’s Infoline responded to 9,889 inquiries. Additionally, 861 individuals fleeing the 
conflict in Sudan secured registration appointments through the Infoline. Since the crisis began, a total of 
614,011 people have successfully been scheduled with appointments using this system. It enables 
refugees to access service information, receive counselling, and book registration appointments in seven 
languages.
14 
 
Education 
UNHCR and partners continued supporting refugee learners through education information sessions and 
vocational training. During March, multiple rounds of advising sessions were delivered to refugee students 
primarily Sudanese , providing guidance to families on school enrolment procedures, required 
documentation, and available education pathways in Egypt. In parallel,  the first round of Technical and 
Vocational Education and Training (TVET) was launched, offering skills -based training for out ‑of‑school 
adolescents, including a Makeup and Nails course for teenage girls. Overall, these interventions aim to 
help refugee students access appropriate education options and strengthen their future learning and 
livelihood opportunities. 
 
In March, UNHCR continued disseminating scholarship opportunities to refugees and asylum ‑seekers 
through social media and community outreach, including master’s programme scholarships  and 
opportunities at the German Hotel School in El Gouna. 
 
Communication with Communities 
On 16 March, UNHCR hosted a live social media session on integrity and complaint mechanisms, taking 
real-time questions from refugees and strengthening two -way communication with the community. The 
one‑hour session has reached over 93,000 views to date. 
 
 
LIBYA  
 
Highlights 
▪ On 3 March, Libya's Anti-Illegal Immigration Agency announced the deportation of 57  individuals 
through Benina International Airport in Benghazi. The operation involved deporting 51 Sudanese 
refugees in coordination with the Sudanese consulate in Benghazi. On 5 March, the DCIM Desert 
Patrols Department intercepted 36 Sudanese refugees west of Tazirbu , including 23 men, 11 
women, and two children. They were found in extremely poor health and humanitarian conditions 
and transferred to Alkufra Detention Centre. 
▪ The Security Registration Card (SRC) centre at the Isolation Centre remains open and operational; 
however, activity levels are low, reflecting the overall slowdown in security campaigns during the 
holy month of Ramadan. As a result of limited SRC issuance,  Sudanese refugees without SRCs 
continue to rely on health certificates to facilitate movement between cities along the Alkufra –
Ajdabiya route. 
Population movements and Registration  
91,494 Sudanese refugees were registered with UNHCR at its Tripoli registration center by the end of 
March 
 
In Alkufra, movement of Sudanese refugees continues primarily via the Chad route, though arrival flows 
remain constrained by high travel costs, security risks, limited transport options, and reported route 
closures between Chad and Sudan. 
 
Protection 
During March, UNHCR strengthened the provision of legal counselling and awareness services at the 
UNHCR Registration Centre, reaching more than 160 individuals, including newly arrived Sudanese 
refugees awaiting registration. Sessions focused on legal rights, common barriers to civil registration, and 
documentation procedures, with particular emphasis on birth registration for children born in Libya.  
In parallel, nine Communication with Communities (CwC) sessions were conducted in reception and 
waiting areas, reaching 438 refugees. These sessions covered UNHCR services, official communication 
channels, and mechanisms for reporting fraud and misconduct,  strengthening accountability and access 
to legal assistance among the refugee population. 
GBV prevention and response  
On the occasion of International Women’s Day 2026, UNHCR organized an awareness session under the 
theme “Rights. Justice. Action. For All Women and Girls.” The session reached 18 refugee women and 
aimed to strengthen their knowledge on GBV, including its forms, associated risks, psychological impacts,
15 
 
prevention measures, and available reporting mechanisms for sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA). 
Participants were also informed about UNHCR protection services and referral pathways  
 
Education 
In March, local authorities in the East and the Sudanese consulate agreed to coordinate the hosting of 
Sudanese secondary school examinations in Benghazi, where approximately 2,000 displaced Sudanese 
refugee students will sit for their exams in mid-April 2026 at the Electrical and Electronic Technical College. 
 
As part of the Community Support Project, the outreach team conducted a focus group discussion at the 
UNHCR office in Tripoli with Sudanese parents whose children attend public schools in Qasr Bin Ghashir. 
Parents highlighted rising school supply costs pla cing significant financial strain on low -income families, 
alongside documentation challenges affecting displaced children who have lost their papers. Key needs 
identified included the provision of school desks, repair of classroom windows, and the creation  of safe 
playground spaces. Parents also recommended complementary interventions such as periodic 
psychologist visits and awareness sessions for teachers on bullying and discrimination.  
 
Shelter and Core Relief Items (CRIs) 
UNHCR provided winter assistance to 6,307 Sudanese refugees in Ajdabiya, Alkufra, almarj, Az zawiyah, 
Benghazi, Tobruk and Tripoli. During Ramadan, distributions continued in Benghazi , reaching more than 
2,000 Sudanese refugees, while across Alkufra, Al-Abyar and Ajdabiya, UNHCR supported a further 2,700 
people from refugee and host communities facing difficult conditions . The assistance included blankets 
and mattresses, solar lamps, kitchen sets, hygiene and dignity kits, jerry cans, clothing, and other essential 
items, helping families to sleep, cook meals, store water, and meet their daily needs.  
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) 
UNHCR donated four mobile latrine units to municipalities in Murzuq, Tazirbu, and Ubari to strengthen 
sanitation services for refugees and host communities. Each unit comprises six toilets and five sinks, 
helping to reduce pressure on public facilities in areas frequently accessed by both refugees and host 
community members. 
 
 
SOUTH SUDAN 
 
Highlights 
▪ From 16 to 18 March 2026, a three -day ECHO mission took place to Renk and Malakal in Upper 
Nile State. In Malakal, the mission visited the Malakal Protection of Civilians (POC) site , recently 
handed over to the government, the Bulukat transit centre, and the Hai Matar area designated for 
durable solutions. In Renk, the delegation visited the Joda border crossing and engaged directly 
with new arrivals, as well as the Renk transit centre and Abukadra settlement. The delegation  
expressed strong satisfaction with the coordination among UNHCR, IOM, and other partners.  
▪ On 6 March, UNHCR in Aweil, in coordination with the Protection team in Juba conducted border 
monitoring training for Directorate of Civil Registry, Nationality, Passport and Immigration 
(DCRNPI) focal points from Sudan -border locations. Participants represented Northern Bahr El 
Ghazal (Majokyinthiou, Kiir Adem), Western Bahr El Gh azal (Boro Medina, Raja Town), and the 
Abyei Administrative Area (Amiet). The training strengthened participants' skills in the use of Kobo 
tools for systematic and timely border monitoring. While focal point capacities were enhanced, 
operational challenges related to office infrastructure, power supply, and connectivity persist as 
barriers to effective border management. 
▪ An inter-agency coordination meeting led by UNHCR, with the participation of sector and sub -
sector co-leads and local authorities, was convened to discuss the Renk Area -Based Solutions 
Strategy. While the draft strategy was reviewed, additional inputs from technical colleagues at the 
state and national levels are still pending. The strategy is a key document aimed at aligning longer-
term solutions-oriented interventions for displaced communities in Renk and the host communities 
receiving them. 
▪ The UNHCR Country Representative met with the Minister of Interior to discuss sustainable 
solutions to challenges facing refugees in South Sudan. Discussions focused on improving 
protection mechanisms, enhancing humanitarian assistance, and strengthening c oordination 
between the Ministry and UNHCR to better support displaced populations. Both sides underscored 
the importance of collaborative engagement on key refugee -related issues, including access to
16 
 
basic services, legal documentation, and longer-term solutions such as voluntary repatriation and 
local integration. 
Population movements and Registration  
Since the onset of the Sudan conflict in April 2023, approximately 1,362,762 individuals have arrived in 
South Sudan. A total of 280,229 people arrived in South Sudan during the reporting period.  
 
During the reporting period, 9,839 households (31,602 individuals) entered South Sudan through Renk, 
comprising South Sudanese returnees (55 per cent) and Sudanese nationals (45 per cent). In contrast, a 
total of 1,462 individuals exited South Sudan, the majority via the Joda/Wunthou border (1,354 individuals), 
with a smaller number (108 individuals) using unofficial crossing points . Cumulatively, from 1 January to 
29 March, outbound movements through Renk reached 11,691 households (33,229 individuals), 
highlighting sustained cross-border mobility despite ongoing insecurity. 
 
Protection 
UNHCR in Aweil conducted a two -day orientation training at Wedweil Refugee Settlement for 32 newly 
recruited Hold the Child Organization (HCO) and Commission for Refugee Affairs (CRA) staff. The training 
covered key topics including the UNHCR mandate, CRI Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) , 
registration procedures, protection monitoring, community -based protection, accountability to affected 
populations, and the UNHCR Code of Conduct. The sessions aimed to strengthen staff capacity to 
effectively engage with new a rrivals and manage protection concerns, with participants demonstrating 
strong commitment to improving service delivery. 
 
During the reporting period, UNHCR partner HCO conducted protection monitoring visits to Wanyjok, 
specifically at the Machar returnee camp in Aweil East. Findings from focus group discussions indicate 
that the area hosts approximately 300 households (2,522  individuals) with urgent needs across shelter 
and NFI support, food assistance, water points, and sanitation. Returnees also reported four snakebite 
cases, resulting in one fatality and three survivors. 
 
Education 
In Maban, Upper Nile, enrolment activities continued across all four camps during the reporting period, 
though overall progress remains limited as partners await the full rollout of digital registration and 
expanded community mobilization. Cumulative enrol ment stands at 17,142 learners in primary schools, 
6,661 in the Accelerated Learning Programme (ALP), and 1,077 in secondary schools. Planned community 
sensitization campaigns are expected to improve enrolment and retention rates, particularly for girls an d 
older learners who continue to face barriers to accessing education. 
 
The 2025 Certificate of Primary Education (CPE) results reflected strong academic performance across 
the Maban camps, with refugee schools ranking among the best in the county. A total of 595 candidates 
sat for the exams (352 male, 243 female), achieving a n overall pass rate of 95 per cent. Male candidates 
recorded a 96 per cent pass rate and female candidates 93  per cent. Doro Camp presented the highest 
number of candidates, with 364 sitting and 339 passing, while Gendrassa achieved a 100% pass rate 
among its 56 learners. Batil registered 66 passes and Kaya 103, despite 17 absentee cases. The results 
indicate improved learning outcomes and strengthened teaching support, though gender disparities in 
performance and attendance remain. 
 
A comprehensive distribution of teaching and learning materials was carried out across all Maban camps 
to support learners who had missed earlier allocations, delivering 22,141 exercise books and 9,079 pens 
to 9,079 learners. Doro received 13,034 books and  5,309 pens, Batil 2,928 books and 1,267 pens, Kaya 
3,980 books and 1,631 pens, and Gendrassa 2,199 books and 872 pens. At the secondary level, Al Bunj 
and Yousif Batil Secondary Schools received 1,882 exercise books, 360 A4 books, and additional teaching 
supplies. Detailed distribution reports will be finalized in the next reporting period. 
 
UNHCR in Aweil conducted a monitoring visit to Early Childhood Care and Development (ECCD) centres 
and integrated primary and secondary schools. Enrolment levels were found to be satisfactory, with 
students paying a registration fee of SSP 15,000 per term. At Salvation Primary School, enrolment stands 
at 834 learners (356 boys, 478 girls), while ECCD enrolment stands at 550 learners (253 male, 297 
female). A two-day needs assessment was also conducted by UNHCR Field Office Aweil in coordination 
with the Relief and Rehabilitation Commission (RRC), the State Ministry of Education, and the Ministry of 
Cooperative and Rural Water, to support planned renovations of primary schools and a Vocational Training
17 
 
Centre under the African Development Bank Group (AfDB ) and BMZ funding. The assessed institutions 
host 1,064 learners (483 boys, 681 girls), including returnees, while the Vocational Training Centre has 
enrolled 100 students for the 2026 academic year. 
 
In Ajuong Thok, 1,775 primary learners received exercise books and pens to ensure equitable access to 
learning materials. Dignity kits containing essential hygiene items were distributed to 543 adolescent girls 
in primary and ALP centres and 622 girls in secondary schools across Ajuong Thok and Pamir, supporting 
menstrual health, reducing absenteeism, and promoting continued participation in education. Plans are 
underway to extend this support to additional learners in Pamir, including late enrolees.  
 
Health 
Health services in Renk face significant strain from collapsed cross -border systems and ongoing arrivals 
from Sudan. Access remains limited in remote areas including Atam, Dukduk, Gongbar, Payuer, 
Awarapiny, and Omdulus, with critical referrals such as dia lysis, unable to reach Juba. Key challenges 
include overstretched staff, stock-outs of essential medicines and HIV test kits, limited WASH and nutrition 
support, poor mobile coverage and the absence of EPI refrigerators at Kolang primary health care center. 
Water scarcity has driven populations toward river areas, increasing consultations at Wunthou and Transit 
Centre health facilities, while Renk Civil Hospital continues to face shortages of anti -malarials and 
essential antibiotics. 
 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) 
In Jamjang, UNHCR and the Action Africa Help International (AAH -I) WASH team held discussions and 
agreed on measures to strengthen water system management in response to recent water supply 
shortages across the two camps. The shortages have been driven by changes in weather conditions 
affecting pump efficiency, as well as increased and diversified competition over borehole water due to the 
absence of alternative sources for livestock, vegetable production, and construction activities.  
 
As part of efforts to promote resource -sharing and peaceful coexistence between refugee and host 
communities, UNHCR facilitated the formal handover of five hand pumps drilled in host community 
settlements in Jamjang. The handover ceremony was attended by U NHCR, CRA representatives, the 
Jamjang County Commissioner, the Director General of the Ministry of Physical Infrastructure and Water 
Resources, and community leaders. Both community members and government representatives 
expressed appreciation to AfDB for  funding the project and to UNHCR for its facilitation. Community 
members also confirmed that a Water Management Committee formed within the community will ensure 
the hand pumps are managed sustainably. 
 
Shelter and NFIs 
In Wedweil, Northern Bahr El Ghazal State, construction of a four -classroom block at Salvation Primary 
School funded under the AfDB Project is 90 per cent complete. The facility will provide learning space for 
host community, refugees, and returnee children. 
 
UNHCR in Aweil in partnership with HCO, distributed NFIs  to 242 households (1,076 individuals) 
comprising newly registered refugee arrivals.  In Jamjang, 107 newly arrived households relocated from 
Yida transit centre and Pamir reception centre were supported with 87 pre-constructed emergency shelters 
upon arrival at the camps. 
 
On housing, land, and property (HLP), the County Commissioner is leading discussions with relevant 
authorities and community members on the allocation of an additional site for integration. The second 
phase of integration was noted to also involve refugees. 
 
Livelihoods 
In Wau, Western Bahr El Ghazal State, Don Bosco Vocational Training Centre, in partnership with UNHCR 
and NRC, is implementing a skills training programme targeting 213 youths, comprising 95 refugees, 20 
returnees, and 98 host community members. A total of 179 trainees (82 refugees, 79 host co mmunity 
members, and 18 returnees) began training on 9 March 2026, with each participant receiving a monthly 
stipend of USD 50. Replacement of those who did not report is expected to be finalized by April 2026.
18 
 
In Aweil, Northern Bahr El Ghazal State, WFP commenced the General Food Distribution for March 2026 
at Wedweil refugee settlement, with UNHCR and partners providing support throughout the exercise. To 
date, 1,263 households (5,708 individuals) have received cash for food assistance.  
 
In Maban, UNHCR completed the surveying and mapping of 4,050 acres of agricultural land across the 
four refugee camps, comprising 2,050 acres in Doro, 600 acres in Batil, 600 acres in Gendrassa, and 800 
acres in Kaya. These sites are now ready for the next  phase, which will involve demarcation, boundary 
marking, and the preparation of internal road layouts to support access and land management. 
 
 
UGANDA 
Highlights 
▪ As of 31 March, Uganda hosted a total of 93,946 Sudanese nationals , including 5,429 Persons 
with Specific Needs (PSNs) predominantly originating from Khartoum (42,265), South Darfur 
(14,220), North Darfur (11,378), South Kordofan (4,696), and Al Jazirah (1,581).  
▪ Kiryandongo Refugee Settlement hosted the largest share of this population at 78,957 individuals. 
Population Movement and Registration 
In March, Uganda registered 837 Sudanese asylum -seekers, of whom 72  per cent  were women and 
children. Eleven individuals were identified as persons with specific needs ( PSNs) across multiple 
vulnerability categories, including unaccompanied or separated children (4), persons with disabilities (3), 
older persons at risk (3), and children at risk (1). 
 
Protection  
Registration  
While Kiryandongo Settlement hosts the largest Sudanese population, the number of new arrivals has 
declined in recent months following the suspension of walk -in registration by the Office of the Prime 
Minister in September 2025. This trend is further compounded by the preference of some Sudanese to 
reside in rented accommodation in towns near the settlement rather than within the settlement itself. 
 
GBV prevention and response  
Over 230 women accessed the Women and Girls' Safe Spaces (WGSS) in Clusters A, E, and G in 
Kiryandongo Settlement. Of these, 49 participated in skilling activities, while others received counselling, 
awareness support, and sessions focused on emotional wellbeing, resilience, and GBV prevention. 
 
Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) 
During the preliminary phase of project implementation, UNHCR partner the Association of Volunteers in 
International Service (AVSI) conducted household targeting exercises across selected settlement zones 
and host communities using the PRA methodology, including a Scorecard Assessment and Participatory 
Wealth Ranking. The exercise confirmed high levels of economic vulnerability, with a significant proportion 
of households classified as poor or extremely poor. A strong correlation of approximately 96 per cent was 
observed between the two assessment tools, demonstrating the reliability of the methodology. Active 
participation of local le aders, Refugee Welfare Councils (RWCs), and community members enhanced 
transparency and strengthened community acceptance of the targeting process.
19 
 
Response Plans and Funding Situation 
 
Regional Refugee Response Plan (RRP) – January - December 2026 
 
The Sudan Regional Refugee Response Plan 2026, launched in February 2026, is an appeal for USD 1.6 
billion for 123 partners to provide essential aid and protection to a total of 5.9 million people in seven 
countries by the end of 202 6. This includes 4 million refugees, returnees, and others who have fled the 
ongoing conflict in Sudan and over 1.8 million host community members.  The Sudan RRP is currently 
funded at 10%. Access UNHCR’s Refugee Funding Tracker (RFT) here.  
 
UNHCR Sudan Situation Appeal – January - December 2026 
UNHCR’s financial requirement for 2026 for the Sudan situation emergency response – in Sudan and RRP 
countries – amounts to USD 929 million.  The appeal is funded at 24% as of 31 March 2026.  
 
Resources   
 
➢ NEW! Development Partners Group Convenes for 4th Meeting on Sudan Regional Crisis  
➢ NEW! Launch of a New Interactive Sudan Crisis Regional Map 
➢ Three years after fleeing Sudan war, Gbreel follows his medical dream to Italy  
➢ Three years on: from fleeing Sudan’s conflict to finding safety and purpose in Chad  
➢ Three years on, war-weary Sudanese remain on the move 
➢ UNHCR Sudan Situation Appeal 2026 
➢ Sudan Regional Refugee Response Plan 2026 
➢ As Sudan war approaches fourth year, humanitarian agencies appeal for support to refugees  
➢ Localization | Sudan Regional Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ Women Advisory Group Sudan | Sudan Regional Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ New Provincial and Sectoral Analysis for Chad Launched on the Development Action Platform | Sudan 
Regional Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ Self-Reliance of Refugees in Chad: A Business Case for Water Spreading Weirs | Sudan Regional 
Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ Chad Government Officially Recognizes 53 Schools Established in Refugee Sites | Sudan Regional 
Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ One Hundred Sudanese Refugee Lawyers Begin Training in Chadian Law for Professional Integration 
| Sudan Regional Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ UNDP Publishes Two New Reports Highlighting Peace Initiatives and Voices from Across Sudan | 
Sudan Regional Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ Development Partners Group Convenes 3rd Meeting | Sudan Regional Crisis - Development Action 
Platform 
➢ New Provincial and Sectoral Analysis for Chad Launched on the Development Action Platform | Sudan 
Regional Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ Agriculture and Food Security | Sudan Regional Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ Climate | Sudan Regional Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ Economic Inclusion | Sudan Regional Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ Policy & Legal | Sudan Regional Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ Social Protection | Sudan Regional Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ Urban & Settlement Planning | Sudan Regional Crisis - Development Action Platform 
➢ OCHA Sudan Humanitarian Dashboard  
➢ Sudan Regional Crisis Development Action Platform  
➢ Refugee Coordination Model  
➢ UNHCR’s Operational Data Portal (ODP) for the Sudan Situation  provides weekly updates on the 
refugee and returnee arrivals in Sudan’s neighbouring countries. 
➢ UNHCR and IOM Joint Dashboard  of arrivals to South Sudan, including data on returnee intentions, 
onward movements, and numbers and locations of returnees in and around Renk.  
➢ UNHCR Global Focus Sudan Operation page 
➢ UNHCR Sudan Emergency website 
➢ UNHCR’s HELP site for Refugees and Asylum -Seekers in Sudan provides information to individuals 
seeking information and support inside Sudan (in English and Arabic)
20 
 
UNHCR is grateful for the support of as of 31 March 2026: 
 
TIGHTLY EARMARKED CONTRIBUTIONS 
              
 
 
   
 
        
 
 
OTHER SOFTLY EARMARKED CONTRIBUTIONS | USD 
Sweden 7.8 million | Switzerland 5.2 million | Canada 3.2 million  
 
Iceland | Private donors 
 
UNEARMARKED CONTRIBUTIONS | USD 
 
Sweden 79.8 million | Norway 61.6 million | Denmark 37.8 million | Germany 27.8 million | Switzerland 
22.1 million | Ireland 14.5 million | Australia 14.3 million | España con ACNUR 12 million | Belgium 10.7 
million  
 
Algeria | Armenia | Canada | Estonia | Finland | Iceland | Kuwait | Lithuania | Luxembourg | Malta | Monaco 
| Montenegro | New Zealand | Qatar | Republic of Korea | Serbia | Singapore | South Africa | Thailand | 
Private donors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contacts: Melike Trigg, Senior Donor Relations Officer, RBESA (trigg@unhcr.org); Natalie Ndunda, Associate Reporting Officer, 
RBESA (ndundan@unhcr.org).