Home
                    


 







                        Middle East
                    








Live


Middle East live: US Vice President JD Vance arrives in Switzerland for Iran peace talks






Issued on: 
21/06/2026 - 07:06
Modified: 
21/06/2026 - 07:36
 

















                US Vice President JD Vance was traveling to Switzerland to meet with Iranian negotiators for new talks on ending the Middle East war.        © Elizabeth Frantz, AFP    
 









                                US Vice President JD Vance landed Sunday in Switzerland for a new round of negotiations with Iranian leadership over the Middle East war, even as Tehran said it was closing the Strait of Hormuz again after Israeli attacks in Lebanon. The framework was signed last week, and negotiators are now in a 60-day sprint to reach an agreement on the technical details. Follow our liveblog for the latest updates.             












21/06/2026 - 07:36
Iran minister says oil industry to be testing ground for any final US-Iran deal


⁠Iran's oil ​industry will ​be a key testing ground for any final ​peace ‌agreement ⁠with the US if Western ‌parties remain committed to ⁠its spirit, Oil Minister Mohsen Paknejad ​said on Sunday.
The ‌ministry's news outlet, Shana, quoted Paknejad ‌as saying that in ​a post-agreement era, Iran's oil sector would offer ​the global economy ​major investment opportunities ​and has hundreds of investment ​projects, as well as technical and operational partnership contracts ready ⁠to be signed.






21/06/2026 - 06:57
US Vice President JD Vance arrives in Switzerland for peace talks with Iran


US Vice President JD Vance landed Sunday in Switzerland to help formally launch negotiations with Iranian leaders over curbing Tehran’s nuclear program and building out the fragile interim deal to end the war in Iran.
The framework was signed last week, and now top US and Iran negotiators are in a 60-day sprint to reach agreement on the technical details that hold massive implications for the world economy and global security.






21/06/2026 - 06:56
US and Iran set for new talks after delay and deadly strikes


A new round of negotiations over the Middle East war was set to kick off Sunday, with Iranian negotiators arriving in the Swiss host city hours ahead of US Vice President JD Vance, even as Tehran said it was closing the Strait of Hormuz again over Israeli attacks in Lebanon.
Before boarding his flight to Europe, Vance told reporters he hoped to "make progress on the nuclear issue, make progress on the Lebanon ceasefire issue. Those are the two big things that I think we're going to be focused on".
Follow-up talks had been planned in Switzerland on Friday but were postponed at the last minute after Israel launched deadly strikes in Lebanon following the deaths of four of its soldiers in combat.






21/06/2026 - 06:55
Recap: Iran says closed Strait of Hormuz as US deal hits obstacle ahead of Swiss talks






21/06/2026 - 06:54
Welcome to our liveblog








 
 
US President 
Donald Trump
 warned that the US could slap tolls on the 
Strait of Hormuz
 if negotiators failed to finalise a deal to end the war in 
Iran
. 
 
 
 
Iran's negotiating team left for Switzerland for discussions on the implementation of the agreement signed between it and the United States to halt the Mideast war.
 
 
 
Iran’s joint military command said that the Strait of Hormuz has been closed again, citing Israeli attacks in 
Lebanon
 and US “bad faith” and “its clear breach of its commitments” by failing to end the war.
 
 
 
(FRANCE 24 with Reuters, AP and AFP)


























4






As it happened





                                    Middle East
                            


















6






As it happened





                                    Middle East
                            


















Keywords for this article