United Nations  
Statement by the Humanitarian Coordinator for Lebanon, Imran Riza: Civilians Bear 
the Brunt of Escalating Hostilities and Displacement Orders in Lebanon 
Beirut, 29 May 2026 
This Eid al-Adha, normally a time of reﬂection and family celebrations, civilians across Lebanon 
faced an appalling escalation of violence, displacement, and human loss. 
I am deeply alarmed by the intensiﬁcation of hostilities and by the impact of displacement orders 
affecting communities across Lebanon, including in Tyre, Nabatieh, and other locations south of 
the Zahrani River. 
The vast scale and unclarity of displacement orders are creating disproportionate panic and 
distress, pushing countless families to make impossible choices in their search for safety . 
There have been shocking reports that airstrikes have harmed civilians as they attempted to leave 
areas under displacement orders. Ongoing hostilities have reportedly hindered efforts by ﬁrst 
responders to assist the injured, including people trapped under rubble in the aftermath of Israeli 
airstrikes. 
The human costs are immense. According to the Ministry of Public Health, at least 31 people 
including women and children were killed and 40 injured in hostilities on 26 May alone. This 
includes 14 people who were reportedly killed in a single airstrike in Borj El Chmali near the city of 
Tyre. In the past week, 15 children have been killed and 62 injured. 
Health workers are facing death and injury on a horriﬁc scale. Since 2 March, 182 attacks have 
resulted in 125 health care personnel killed and 311 injured, according to the WHO surveillance 
system for attacks on health care (SSA). 
International humanitarian law is clear. The protection of civilians, including health workers and 
ﬁrst responders, must be ensured.  
The ceaseﬁre announcement raised hopes for a return to normal life. However, instead of families 
going home, the displacement of civilians continues unabated. 
Men, women, and children continue to ﬂee their homes for safety . Shelters are now overﬂowing. 
Schools continue to be displacement sites, robbing children from their right to education.   
It is distressing to see the unique historical heritage of Lebanon, including Tyre, a UNESCO World 
Heritage Site, and a site inscribed under enhanced protection, being threatened by the hostilities. 
One week ago, I was in Tyre meeting with displaced people in a collective shelter. Some families 
told me they had been forced to move ﬁve times in the last two years. 
Their wishes were crystal clear: de-escalation, a true stop to hostilities, the possibility of rebuilding 
their lives, and hope for the futures of their children.   
 END 
For more information, please contact the United Nations Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs in Lebanon: 
Ms. Kristen Knutson, Head of Office - OCHA. E-mail: Knutson@un.org