11/06/2026 - 11:57
Israel to allocate $338 million for West Bank settlement expansion, rights group says


Israel is expected to ⁠approve on Thursday ​the allocation of 1 billion shekels ($337.8 million) to build new settlements and connect them to infrastructure ​in the occupied West Bank, Israeli anti-settlement group Peace Now said.
The plan is being promoted by Israel's far-right finance minister Bezalel Smotrich, a proponent of Israeli settlement expansion who has said he wants to ​bury the ‌idea of Palestinian statehood.
Both Peace Now and the news website Axios, citing ​a draft resolution, said the allocation of funds would include construction of infrastructure such as ​access roads, land preparation, sewage systems, water connections and related works, as ​well as temporary residential compounds.
UN bodies and most countries view the West Bank settlements as illegal, citing international conventions. Israel disputes this, saying a Jewish ‌presence has existed in the West Bank for thousands of years.






11/06/2026 - 11:53
Iran maritime body says Hormuz completely closed 'until further notice'


Iran's new body overseeing the Strait of Hormuz on Thursday confirmed a complete closure order for the strategic waterway until further notice, after the Revolutionary Guards announced the move overnight.
"Due to the tensions caused by the aggression of the American forces in the region and the announcement made last night by the Iranian armed forces, the Strait of Hormuz will be closed until further notice," the Persian Gulf Strait Authority said in a post on X. 
"Applicants who have been granted a transit permit are asked to be patient and wait for instructions from the PGSA.”






11/06/2026 - 11:28
US and Iran exchange fire for a second day, undermining shaky ceasefire


The United States and Iran traded air ​attacks for a second straight day on Thursday, with President Donald Trump vowing further strikes if Tehran does not immediately agree to a peace deal. 
﻿
The escalation in hostilities began this week with Monday's downing of a US Apache helicopter near the Strait of Hormuz, which sparked a series of tit-for-tat attacks across Iran and on US bases around the region.






11/06/2026 - 10:18
Iran foreign ministry says US strikes render ceasefire 'practically meaningless'


Iran's foreign ministry condemned latest US strikes on the country, saying the attacks rendered the nearly two-month ceasefire "practically meaningless".
In a statement, the ministry said "the illegal and criminal attacks perpetrated by the United States in recent hours not only constitute a flagrant violation... but also render the ceasefire practically meaningless".
It added that the "responsibility for the extremely serious consequences of this criminal act lies with the leaders of the United States".
Meanwhile, three Iranian sources ​told ‌Reuters that efforts ​to ​reach a preliminary deal between ​Iran ‌and ⁠the ‌US had ⁠intensified as ​they ​discuss a ​mechanism ​over releasing frozen Iranian funds.






11/06/2026 - 10:03
Iran says US projectile hit Iranian cargo barge off Oman, crew rescued


An Iranian ​cargo barge ​was hit by a US projectile in the ​Gulf ‌of Oman ⁠early on Thursday, ‌the Iranian governor of Sirik ⁠county said, according to Mehr news agency.
The ​150-ton cargo ‌barge, owned by locals from Sirik ‌and carrying essential goods from ​the Omani port of Khasab, was hit about 5 ​nautical miles ​off Khasab, ​the Iranian official said, adding ​that all five crew members were rescued by passing vessels ⁠and taken to Oman.






11/06/2026 - 09:44
Pakistan says engaged in US-Iran mediation despite escalation, urges talks


Pakistan's foreign ministry has said the country's leaders were still engaged in mediation efforts to end the US-Iran war despite a surge in conflict, calling for a "negotiated settlement".
“It is hard to be an optimist in the new exchange of hostilities. We haven't lost hope, we remain engaged," foreign ministry spokesman Tahir Andrabi told journalists.
"We are of the view that diplomacy and dialogue should be the guiding principles for achieving a negotiated settlement of all contentious issues," Andrabi added. 
He added that Pakistan's interior minister had returned from a visit to Tehran in recent days where he gave a message and letter from the prime minister to Iranian leadership as part of the mediation efforts. 






11/06/2026 - 09:40
Qatari negotiators depart Tehran after talks on US, Iran, diplomat tells AFP






11/06/2026 - 02:25
US military denies Iran's claim that Strait of Hormuz is closed


The US military has denied Iran's claim that the Strait of Hormuz had been fully closed in response to the latest US strikes.
"TRUTH: Commercial ships are continuing to transit in and out of the Strait of Hormuz tonight," US Central Command, which oversees forces in the region, posted on X.






11/06/2026 - 09:35
Three injured in overnight US strikes on Iran, media reports


US strikes overnight Thursday on Iran wounded at least three people at sites in Tehran province, Iran's Fars news agency reported.
"Three people were injured in incidents related to the brutal US attacks in Tehran province," said head of the province's emergency services Mohammad Esmail Tavakoli.
The strikes were largely focused on southern Iran but the country's Revolutionary Guards said other sites near the capital were hit including in Karaj, Nazarabad and Pishva.






11/06/2026 - 09:34
Jordan's military says intercepted 20 missiles launched from Iran






11/06/2026 - 09:18
Three Indian sailors killed aboard ship hit by US off Oman


Three Indian sailors on a commercial vessel hit by the United States off the coast of Oman are dead, New Delhi's shipping minister has said.
"It is deeply unfortunate to learn of the tragic incident aboard the Palau-flagged MT Settebello," Sarbananda Sonowal said in a statement, referring to the strike on the vessel a day earlier.
"Sadly, three Indian seafarers initially reported missing are now confirmed dead after bodies have been located and identified".






11/06/2026 - 09:17
Fire breaks out on tanker off Omani coast, UK monitor says


A ​tanker ​experienced a fire in the ​engine ‌room ⁠21 ‌nautical miles northeast ⁠of Oman's Sohar ​on Thursday, the ‌United Kingdom Maritime ‌Trade ​Operations agency cited local authorities as ​saying.
No ​environmental impact ​has ​been reported, UKMTO added.






11/06/2026 - 09:12
'Our worries are increasing day by day': A Lebanese family lives through war


FRANCE 24 speaks to a Lebanese family living in Beirut about how the ongoing war is impacting their daily life. 






11/06/2026 - 08:30
Smoke rises in north Iran after reports of strikes across the country 


A screen grab from a social media video shows smoke rising above the Iranian town of Karaj, near Tehran, after state news agencies reported explosions were heard in several cities across the country.
© Social media via Reuters






11/06/2026 - 08:26
Debris from intercepted Iranian drones injures child, damages homes, Bahrain says


Bahrain's ​Interior Ministry ​has said that an 11-year-old girl ​suffered ‌minor ⁠injuries, while vehicles ‌caught fire and ⁠homes were damaged in Hamad ​Town and the ‌capital Manama after debris ‌fell from ​Iranian drones that were intercepted and destroyed.
The ministry ​published pictures ​showing ​fire fighters trying to ​put out blaze in several homes.
Firefighters work to extinguish fire in the aftermath of
 Iran
ian drone attacks in Bahrain. © Ministry of Interior of the Kingdom of Bahrain via Reuters






11/06/2026 - 07:55
Kuwait reopens airspace after temporary suspension following Iranian attacks


Kuwait ​has resumed air ​traffic and Kuwait International ​Airport has ‌returned ⁠to ‌normal operations after a temporary ⁠suspension prompted by Iranian attacks, ​the civil ‌aviation authority said.






11/06/2026 - 07:31
Ceasefire 'has never looked more fragile' as US launches second night of strikes on Iran


With the US launching a second night of strikes on Iran, the ceasefire between the two countries "has never looked more fragile", David Smith Washington bureau chief with The Guardian told FRANCE 24.
This is despite US President Donald Trump's repeated claims that the US has been making progress on peace negotiations. 






11/06/2026 - 01:32






11/06/2026 - 01:30