The conflict between the 
US
, 
Israel
 and 
Iran
 has pushed regional heavyweight Egypt into a diplomatic and strategic dilemma.


Egypt is not only a close ally of the US and Gulf states — it is a signatory to the 1979 Camp David Accords with Israel — but was also on the verge of restoring full diplomatic ties with Iran in early 2026.


Cairo's tightrope walk has so far included publicly 
condemning
 Iranian 
attacks on Gulf states
 while offering limited military support. It has sought to position itself as a mediator between 
Tehran
 and 
Washington
, alongside parallel efforts by 
Pakistan
, 
Turkey
 and 
Qatar
. President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi also visited the United Arab Emirates in May.


"
Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi
 views the conflict primarily as a threat to domestic stability," Michelle Pace, a Middle East analyst and academic visitor at the University of Oxford, told DW. "Egypt's core objective is to stay out of the 
Iran war
 while containing its economic and security fallout."


However, this approach has caused tensions with Egypt's Gulf partners, who expect support from their allies in the face of Iranian attacks on their territories, interests and assets, Timothy E. Kaldas, deputy director of the Washington-based Tahrir Institute for Middle East Policy, told DW.


"There are not very subtle statements coming particularly from the United Arab Emirates that indicate frustration and anger with Egypt," he said.


For example, Anwar Gargash, foreign policy adviser to the UAE presidency, recently wrote on X that "The Arab Gulf states have been a support and partner to all in times of prosperity … so where are you today in this time of hardship?" Regional analysts understand the statement was directed at Cairo. 
Tourism has plummeted in Egypt as a result of the region-wide conflict
Image: Nese Ari/Anadolu/picture alliance


Economic dependence


Egypt
, the most populous Arab nation with around 120 million people, also feels the the economic ripple effects of the war with Iran. After the Iran-aligned 
Houthi militia
 in Yemen resumed attacks on 
shipping in the Red Sea
 and Bab al-Mandab Strait in support of Iran, traffic through Egypt's Suez Canal was 
reduced
. A recent analysis by the International Crisis Group found that Suez Canal revenues fell by 38% in the first quarter of 2026.


"The war is hurting an economy that had been showing tentative signs of recovery from the doldrums of 
COVID-19
 and the consequences of 
wars in Ukraine
 and 
Gaza
," the analysis said.


Egypt's minister of petroleum and mineral resources, Karim Badawi, said Wednesday that Egypt had managed to reduce arrears owed to oil and gas ‌partners from about $6.1 billion in ⁠June 2024 to zero in June 2026.


The economic recovery after years of 
protracted crisis
 has been largely driven by Gulf investments, the report's authors noted. "Saudi Arabia and Kuwait have deposited $5.3 billion and $4 billion with the Egyptian central bank, respectively, while the United Arab Emirates has injected $35 billion into the country through a 
major real estate acquisition
 and Qatar has committed to investing $29.7 billion in another massive property deal," the Crisis Group's 
analysis
said. The World Bank, the 
EU
 and the International Monetary Fund have also helped to stabilize Egypt's economic in recent years.


Now, the outlook appears to be worsening again. Not only have Suez Canal revenues fallen, but 
tourism has also declined
, and energy and food prices have increased.


Furthermore, the Gulf states are themselves facing significant economic losses and 
enormous costs
 : damaged buildings and infrastructure must be repaired, munitions replenished, and defense capabilities expanded, Kaldas pointed out.


"The availability of financial support, even if they wanted to provide it, may be coming under pressure, especially given that Egypt will be competing with reconstruction needs in 
Lebanon
, 
Syria
 and 
Gaza
," he said.
The Gulf states have been among the largest investors in the Middle East, however, the Iran war might change this in future
Image: Nir Elias/REUTERS


Diplomatic pressure


Meanwhile, the US is also turning the diplomatic screws on Egypt. Reuters reported on May 25 that US President 
Donald Trump
 said he had asked Saudi Arabia, Qatar, 
Pakistan
, Egypt, Turkey and Jordan to 
join the Abraham Accords
 and normalize relations with Israel as part of his push to secure support for a potential agreement involving Iran.


In 2020 and 2021, the 
United Arab Emirates
, 
Bahrain
, 
Morocco
 and 
Sudan
 already 
normalized ties
 with Israel, under the Abraham Accords. 
Saudi Arabia
 halted negotiations after the 
Hamas attack
 on Israel on October 7, 2023 and the ensuing war in Gaza, and made the establishment of a pathway for an independent Palestinian state a condition. Egypt and Jordan signed peace treaties with Israel in 1979 and 1994, respectively.


Kaldas views Trump's latest push for normalization as more of a desperate effort to claim some sort of achievement in the Iran conflict.


"Egypt is also concerned about the hostile posture of the Israelis in the region, so giving them any sort of additional diplomatic support is almost certainly not something that the Egyptian government is going to want to do at this time," he said.


Ties
 between Egypt and Israel have been 
deteriorating
 since the Gaza war. Israel has repeatedly said it would like to see millions of Palestinians in Gaza 
relocate to Egypt.


Moreover, Cairo is also wary of an outright collapse of Iran, Michelle Pace warned: "This would strengthen Israel's regional dominance," she said, adding that all of this limits Cairo's strategic autonomy and pushes it toward pragmatic diplomacy rather than confrontation.
Foreign investments helped Egypt's economy to recover but Egyptians fear rising prices again
Image: Ahmed Gomaa/Xinhua/picture alliance


Crackdown on political dissent


At the same time, Cairo also needs to consider 
public discontent
, Kaldas noted, adding that "In Egyptian public opinion, quite a large portion of the population is on Iran's side in this war and sees it as the wronged party."


For Egyptian President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi this means "not sticking his neck out too much in defense of what most Egyptians see as US-Israeli aggression against Iran."


However, public signs of dissent remain prohibited. Since the outbreak of the Gaza war, occasional demonstrations have been broken up by police and participants detained.


Sarah Leah Whitson, former director of the human rights organization DAWN, warned that other conflicts in the Middle East have allowed the Egyptian government 
to avoid scrutiny
 of its deplorable human rights record.


"Thousands remain unjustly imprisoned in sham trials; dozens of journalists and 
human rights activists
 are detained, while thousands more face new charges in mass terrorism cases," she told DW. "The military's power has expanded dramatically with the same powers of arrest and prosecution of over ordinary citizens as the justice ministry."
Middle East fears Iran-Israel fighting could become new norm
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that 
supports HTML5 video