Romania and its NATO allies have reacted angrily after a Russian drone crashed into an apartment building in eastern 
Romania
, injuring two people.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Bucharest on Friday labelled the crash of the drone, part of an overnight attack aimed at Ukraine, a serious violation of international law. The incident is just the latest incursion along the alliance‚Äôs eastern flank, raising concern that the risk of an open confrontation between Russia and NATO states is rising.
Romania said the overnight drone was tracked by radar in its airspace before crashing onto the roof of a residential building in the city of Galati.
Two F-16 fighter jets and a helicopter were scrambled, as authorities issued emergency alerts to residents. Two people suffered minor injuries, and several residents were evacuated after a fire was triggered by the crash.
‚ÄòConsequences‚Äô
The incident is just the latest of several, as the war in Ukraine has spilled over into neighbouring NATO countries, raising fears of potential escalation.
Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia, as well as 
Finland
, have reported repeated incursions into their airspace in recent months. Drone incursions led to a 
government collapse
 in Latvia earlier this month.
Shortly after the crash, Bucharest called for NATO to speed up the transfer of anti-drone capabilities. Outgoing Prime Minister Ilie Bolojan also said Romania would, within hours, sign ‚ÅÝa contract which ‚ÅÝwill give it anti-drone defences ‚Äåunder the European Union‚Äôs 
SAFE programme
.
On Friday morning, Romania summoned the Russian ambassador.
‚ÄúWe will officially communicate the consequences that this lack of responsibility on the part of the Russian Federation will have for the diplomatic relations between our countries, as well as the next steps at the European level regarding sanctions packages,‚Äù Foreign Minister Oana Toiu wrote on social media.
President Nicusor Dan said Romania ‚ÅÝwill ‚ÅÝnot accept that the war of aggression ‚ÅÝwaged by Russia against ‚ÅÝUkraine be transferred to its citizens, and added that he had asked the Foreign Ministry ‚ÅÝto present without delay ‚ÅÝa series ‚ÅÝof measures regarding the country‚Äôs relationship with Russia, ‚Äúproportionate to ‚Äåthis very serious situation‚Äù.
 
 
NATO allies and others joined the chorus of anger.
French Minister for European Affairs Benjamin Haddad said the incident highlighted the threat Russia poses to European security, noting that French troops are stationed in Romania.
‚ÄúRegardless of ‚ÅÝwhether it was on purpose ‚ÅÝor the ‚ÅÝresult ‚ÅÝof ineptitude, Russia is still dangerous and ‚Äåwe must defend ourselves against ‚Äåit,‚Äù ‚ÄåPolish ‚ÅÝForeign Minister Radoslaw Sikorski told ‚ÅÝthe Reuters news agency.
European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said the incident showed that ‚ÄúRussia‚Äôs war of aggression has crossed yet another line.‚Äù
A NATO spokesperson also condemned ‚ÄúRussia‚Äôs recklessness‚Äù on social media.
Ukraine‚Äôs Foreign Minister Andrii Sybiha, whose country is pressing the United States to help boost its air defences, pledged that ‚ÄúUkraine stands firmly by Romania‚Äù as he branded Russia a threat to the Black Sea region and the wider ‚ÄåEuropean continent.
‚ÄúWe are ready ‚ÅÝto work closely together ‚ÅÝto strengthen protection from such threats,‚Äù he wrote on social media, adding that the bid to ‚ÅÝstrengthen Ukraine‚Äôs ‚ÅÝair defence is a ‚Äústrategic task‚Äù to protect not only ‚ÄåUkraine but also reduce risks for ‚Äåneighbouring ‚Äåcountries.
United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres warned that the escalating attacks risk spiralling ‚Äúout of control‚Äù, with ‚Äúunknown and unintended consequences‚Äù.
He said more civilians had been killed in the first four months of this year than during the same period in the previous three years, and called for diplomacy, immediate de-escalation and ‚Äúa full and unconditional ceasefire‚Äù.
Rising risk
Concern that the war is threatening to spill over is building, as Russia escalates hostilities in a bid to ward off rising political and economic pressure at home.
Ukrainian forces reported that they shot down 217 drones overnight on Friday. Russia attacked with 232 drones and one ballistic missile. Hits were recorded in 14 areas, Kyiv‚Äôs air force said.
Moscow has said it plans 
‚Äúsystematic strikes‚Äù
 on Kyiv and has issued a barrage of threats at Ukraine‚Äôs European allies, listing facilities in Europe that it said are involved in manufacturing drones and components for Ukraine.
Moscow‚Äôs Foreign Intelligence Service recently warned the Baltic nations that their NATO membership would not protect them from retaliation should they allow Ukraine to launch attacks from their territory, with analysts warning that the risk of an open confrontation between Russia and NATO states is rising.
That heightens concern regarding NATO‚Äôs Article 5 collective defence clause, which President Donald Trump has hinted the US may not honour in some cases.
However, the US ambassador to NATO denounced the ‚Äúreckless incursion‚Äù in a social media post, although he did not explicitly call out Russia for the incident.
‚ÄúWe will defend every inch of NATO territory‚Äù wrote Matthew Whitaker.
Secretary-General Mark Rutte also insisted that NATO will defend all of its territory.
‚ÄúRussia‚Äôs reckless behaviour is a danger to us all,‚Äù he wrote on social media. ‚ÄúLast ‚ÅÝnight showed yet again ‚ÅÝthat the implications of their illegal war of aggression don‚Äôt ‚ÅÝstop at the border.‚Äù