After more than four years of war, the European Union has stepped up its 
efforts
 to bring an end to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine with two new measures.


First, Brussels announced the addition of 34 new individuals and 47 new entities to its sanctions package against Russia. Second, notable progress has been made on accession to EU membership for Ukraine and Moldova, which would provide both these Russian neighbors with a significant extra layer of security.


New Sanctions Expand Beyond Energy


The additions to the list of sanctioned entities, announced on June 15, target Russia’s shadow fleet of oil tankers, its military-industrial complex, hybrid warfare activity, and human rights violators.


EU sanctions have focused on reducing Moscow’s ability to fund the war by restricting those involved in Russia’s energy trade. Yet Russia continues to circumvent these sanctions, especially through its shadow fleet.


The latest additions include more individuals and companies that transport Russian oil and petroleum products. Other newly sanctioned entities include drone developers and producers, as well as entities in third countries, such as China, who play a role in Russia’s defense supply and production.


The new sanctions package also punishes individuals who contribute to Russia’s disinformation campaigns by disseminating propaganda. Finally, sanctions have also been imposed on those involved in the death of Alexei Navalny, a Russian opposition leader poisoned in 2024 while he was serving a prison sentence.


EU Membership Draws Closer for Ukraine and Moldova


At the same time as extending and deepening sanctions against Russia, the EU 
opened
 discussions of the “fundamentals” in accession talks with Ukraine and Moldova. This round of negotiations deals with both democratic and economic principles.


Progress was 
blocked
 for the past two years by former Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban, who was defeated in his country’s April election. Hungary’s new prime minister, Peter Magyar, has 
reversed
 his predecessor’s policy. Under the EU’s accession framework, negotiations are 
organized
 into six thematic clusters. The EU sets reform benchmarks in each, and candidate countries must align their laws and institutions with EU standards.


There are still many steps that must occur before Ukraine or Moldova can be granted EU membership, a timeline that typically 
spans
 almost a decade.


EU and U.S. Should Speak With One Voice


European leaders have 
indicated
 that they want a more direct role in negotiations to end Russia’s war against Ukraine. However Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov has 
rejected
 the European Union’s approach, underscoring Moscow’s preference for negotiating with Washington and limiting any diplomatic role for Brussels.


Sanctions are an important step to exploit weaknesses and signal Europe’s seriousness about punishing Russia. Yet, sanctions alone are not sufficient pressure on Russia, Europe must present coordinated military, economic, and diplomatic actions.


The United States and its European allies must strengthen deterrence. The United States, France, and the United Kingdom should lead a coalition of willing allies to expand military exercises in Poland and along NATO’s eastern flank, making clear that any challenge to NATO’s collective defense will trigger a united response. In addition to demonstrating their own military capabilities, European nations must accelerate military support for Ukraine.


Moreover, the European Union should fast-track Ukraine’s accession. A decade-long wait is too long, and a clearer path to membership could help underpin a durable peace. Ukraine, in turn, must recommit to the reforms needed to meet EU standards.


Next, Washington and Brussels should tighten sanctions on third-country entities that support Russian defense production and energy trade.


Finally, Europe should coordinate with the United States to present one cohesive Western approach to negotiating the end of the conflict. Speaking with one voice will amplify diplomatic pressure and limit Russia’s flexibility to garner concessions and manipulate negotiations.


Europe’s recent efforts to end the war show progress on transatlantic burden-sharing, but they are only the first step. Europe should continue increasing pressure on Russia through further sanctions and stronger deterrence.


Ivana Stradner
 is a research fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies (FDD) where her research focuses on Russia and information operations. For more analysis from the author and FDD, please subscribe 
HERE
. Follow FDD on X 
@FDD
.
  FDD is a Washington, DC-based, nonpartisan research institute focusing on national security and foreign policy.