09/07/2026 - 09:22
Qatar tells Iran all parties should commit to diplomacy following escalation with US


Qatari Prime ​Minister Sheikh Mohammed bin ​Abdulrahman al-Thani told Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araqchi in ​a ‌phone call ⁠on Thursday that Iran ‌and the United States should ⁠commit to diplomacy.
Al-Thani added that the Washington ​and Tehran should implement ‌the signed memorandum of understanding aimed at ‌ending the war, the Qatari ​foreign minister said.
Iran launched drones towards a site in ​Qatar earlier on Thursday ​and a ​Qatari tanker was attacked in ​the Strait of Hormuz earlier the week. Al-Thani condemned the attack in ⁠the call, the foreign ministry ⁠said.






09/07/2026 - 08:46
Iran's health ministry says two days of US air strikes have killed at least 14 people, wounded 78


Two days of US strikes against Iran have killed 14 people and left 78 injured, Tehran's health ministry said on Thursday.
"Of the injured, 47 are still hospitalised and the rest have been discharged after receiving medical care," Hossein Kermanpour, the ministry's head of public relations posted on X.






09/07/2026 - 08:31
French foreign minister blames Iran for US attacks


France's Foreign Minister Jean-Noel Barrot on Thursday said that had brought new US attacks upon itself by violating a truce deal.
"It was Iran that, by targeting ships sailing in Omani waters, violated its own commitments as well as international law," Barrot told TF1 television when asked about the latest US strikes.
"Iran violated the agreement reached with the United States" last month, Barrot added, calling for calm between the rival forces.
"This type of manoeuvre must absolutely stop so that these crucial negotiations can continue under the best possible conditions," he said.






09/07/2026 - 08:12
Iran army targets sites in Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain, according to state media 


Iran's military said it had targeted sites in Kuwait, Qatar and Bahrain with one-way attack drones on Thursday, state media reported, in retaliation for US strikes earlier in the day.
The army said "in continuation of the attacks by the Islamic Republic of Iran's army on US bases in the region" it had targeted a Patriot missile interceptor system in Kuwait, an early warning system in Qatar and fuel tanks in Bahrain with "a large number of various types of army kamikaze drones".  






09/07/2026 - 07:29
Iran's Tehran-Mashhad railway suspended after US strikes: state TV


The train service between Tehran and Mashhad has been suspended after US strikes, state TV reported, hours before late supreme leader Ali Khamenei was due to be buried in the eastern Iranian holy city.
The Islamic Republic of Iran Railways blamed "a criminal attack by the US-Israeli enemy" on the route and said it had dispatched teams to repair the damage, the state broadcaster reported, adding that road transport was being arranged for stranded passengers.






09/07/2026 - 06:54
US strikes kill three in western Iran: Iranian state media


US strikes on Iran killed three people and wounded several others in the country's west, official news agency IRNA reported on Thursday, quoting a local official.
Valiollah Hayati, the deputy governor of Khuzestan for security and law enforcement, told reporters that three people were killed and several wounded in the American attack on the outskirts of city of Ahvaz, the IRNA report said.






09/07/2026 - 06:44
Iran Foreign Ministry spokesperson blast NATO chief's 'willful complicity' in the war on Iran








09/07/2026 - 05:13
US military says it has ended its latest round of strikes on Iran after hitting 90 targets


The US military said Thursday it had ended its latest round of airstrikes targeting Iran after hitting some 90 targets. The US military’s Central Command made the statement.
It released black-and-white footage of what appeared to be strikes targeting an airport runway and missile launchers.
“US forces remain vigilant, lethal, and prepared to execute operations directed by the Commander in Chief,” it added.






09/07/2026 - 04:46
Iran Guards say hit US bases in Kuwait, Bahrain, threaten to expand strike


Iran's Revolutionary Guards (IRGC) said Thursday they had struck US military bases in Bahrain and Kuwait in response to fresh American strikes, in a statement carried by state television IRIB.
The Guards said they struck "key infrastructure and facilities" at US bases in Arifjan and Ali Al Salem in Kuwait, and Juffair and Sheikh Isa in Bahrain with missiles and drones.
They also warned their responses would expand to other bases across the region if US attacks were repeated.






09/07/2026 - 04:08
Iran says Strait of Hormuz will open only under its arrangements


Iran's chief negotiator said Thursday that the Strait of Hormuz would be opened only under "Iranian arrangements", after Tehran and Washington traded strikes in the Middle East.
"The United States still has not learned that bullying and breaking its promises no longer come without consequences," Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf said on X. "Let me be clear: If you strike, you will be struck."






09/07/2026 - 04:07
Explosions heard in Bahrain capital after air raid sirens


Explosions were heard in Bahrain's capital on Thursday, an AFP correspondent in Manama said, moments after authorities sounded air raid sirens to warn of an attack.
The blasts followed a vow from Iran's Revolutionary Guards that they would "give a devastating response" to fresh American strikes on the Islamic republic's territory.






09/07/2026 - 04:07
Kuwait intercepts missile and drone attacks, military says


Kuwait's air defences were intercepting "hostile missile and drone attacks", its military said on Thursday.
"The General Staff of the Army notes that any explosions heard are a result of air defence systems intercepting hostile attacks," the Kuwait military said in a post on X, without specifying their origin.






09/07/2026 - 04:07
Missile alerts sound in Bahrain and Qatar after US strikes on Iran


Missile alerts sounded early Thursday morning in Bahrain and Qatar after the United States launched a new round of airstrikes targeting Iran.
There was no immediate word of any damage in the two Gulf Arab states.
On Wednesday, Iran launched attacks on Bahrain and Kuwait over US airstrikes.






09/07/2026 - 04:06
 
Welcome to the France 24 liveblog covering events in the Middle East. You can catch up on yesterday's developments 
here
.