Following the collapse of the 2015 Iran nuclear deal and the region’s chaotic recent military escalations, the United Nations dedicated nuclear agency has “lost continuity of knowledge” about the Iranian nuclear programme it was once tasked with overseeing, the Security Council heard today, in a briefing by the Organization’s senior political affairs officer.
At the outset, delegates sharply debated whether discussions about the Iran nuclear programme — as laid out in 
resolution 2231 (2015)
 — are even rightfully under the Council’s purview.  Members voted 11 in favour to 2 against (China, Russian Federation), with 2 abstentions (Pakistan, Somalia), to hold the meeting.
Resolution 2231 (2015) endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action — commonly known as the Iran nuclear deal reached after years of negotiations between the United States, Iran and other key actors.  It suspended sanctions on Iran and stated that the Council would end its consideration of Iran’s nuclear programme in October 2025, the original date when the deal was slated to expire, unless so-called “snapback measures” were activated.
Several parties to the deal activated those snapback measures, though the validity of the process is highly contested by others, notably China and the Russian Federation.
“A framework for further negotiations remains a critical step towards the peaceful settlement of the Iran nuclear issue,” said Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, following the procedural vote.
Presenting the Secretary-General’s 
most recent report
 on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), she said the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has received no updated nuclear declarations from Iran and has been unable to conduct visits to any sites in the country.  
Moreover, she said, the Agency has conducted no activities under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Safeguards Agreement — namely, the instrument that had once enabled it to verify and monitor Iran’s compliance under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. 
“The Agency also reported a significant deterioration in its situational awareness following the attacks against Iran by the United States and Israel that began on 28 February 2026,” she said.  “It has now lost continuity of knowledge across all of Iran’s declared nuclear facilities […] extending to the production and current inventory of centrifuges, rotors and bellows, heavy water and uranium ore concentrate.”
Against that backdrop, she stressed that, while significant differences remain between the relevant parties, each has underscored the importance of achieving a diplomatic solution.  That willingness to engage was reflected in the 17 June Memorandum of Understanding reached between the United States and Iran, she said, urging those parties to continue negotiations with UN support. 
Council Members Debate Sanctions, Diplomacy
As Council members and affected countries took the floor, speakers diverged widely on their interpretations of events over the last decade, and their implications for Iran and the wider region.  Many argued that UN sanctions against Iran remain in force, and all UN Member States — including Council members — are obliged to respect and implement them.  “While we sincerely welcome the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding between the United States and Iran, it must now be comprehensively implemented,” said Latvia’s delegate, echoed by the representatives of Denmark, Greece, Panama and Colombia,
 
among others.  
However, she said, “the recent bouts of repeated escalation are unacceptable.”  While Latvia wishes to see continued diplomatic engagement and future talks, “the legal reality so far has not changed”, she stressed.
The representative of the European Union echoed those points.  Despite all diplomatic efforts, he said, Iran’s escalating nuclear trajectory over the last six years is an “urgent and profound nuclear proliferation concern”, and Iran “must never be allowed to acquire a nuclear weapon”. 
Bahrain’s delegate said that since 28 February, his region has witnessed “one of the most dangerous waves of escalation in its modern history” as a result of Iran’s unjustified attacks. Mere hours after the Memorandum’s announcement, Iran rushed to undermine its peaceful content by resuming its attacks against Bahrain and other Gulf nations, while also threatening freedom of navigation.  “For Iran, diplomacy is not a path for resolving disputes but rather a means of managing crises and gaining time,” he stressed.
Western Delegates Press Iran on Compliance
“The fragility of the current situation underscores the need to keep the current negotiations on track,” said the representative of the United Kingdom.  She noted that her country, along with France and Germany, triggered snapback sanctions on Iran as a result of that country’s significant non-compliance with its commitments under the Iran deal, leading to the return into effect of previously lifted sanctions resolutions — including a binding, two-way arms embargo. 
Germany’s delegate declared:  “In these uncertain times […] a verifiable agreement that addresses the urgent concerns regarding Iran’s nuclear activities is indispensable.”  Like several other speakers, he expressed his country’s willingness to assess and support the lifting of nuclear-related sanctions, “but only after concrete, verifiable steps” by Tehran and its full compliance with all legally binding obligations under the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
“The origin of this crisis is the conduct of Iran,” which has persistently violated its commitments, agreed France’s representative.  Iran has accumulated enough highly enriched uranium to produce around 10 nuclear explosive devices and the IAEA has now found the country to be in breach of its safeguards agreement.  While the Memorandum of Understanding with the United States was a “first positive step”, Iran must now reopen the Strait of Hormuz and launch negotiations within 60 days, resulting in a non-proliferation agreement, he said.
The representative of the United States said the measures reinstated last September “were designed to address a nuclear programme that has long sought to advance beyond the international community’s line of sight”.  Meanwhile, she said, over the past week, “Iran has taken actions that defy the substance and the spirit of the understanding established between our two countries”.
While Tehran has a historic opportunity to transform itself and “the door to diplomacy remains open”, he warned that the United States will continue to hold Iran accountable for any acts of war.  “If you shoot at civilian objects or ships, we will respond,” she stressed.
Russian Federation, China Challenge Council Approach
In sharp contrast, the representative of the Russian Federation — whose delegation called for today’s procedural vote — rejected the Council’s longstanding “anti-Iranian position”. She said Western countries are cynically attempting to lay the blame for the collapse of the Iran nuclear deal at Tehran’s door, when the real blow to the agreement was the United States’ unilateral withdrawal in 2018.  Concerns about Iran’s nuclear programme are completely fabricated, she added, noting that the IAEA never once verified a transfer of nuclear materials for military uses in that country. 
China’s delegate, who also voted against holding today’s meeting, said tensions between the United States and Iran eased temporarily following the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding in June.  That cessation of hostilities must be maintained, he said, urging the parties to return to negotiations, “filter out distractions”, address each other’s legitimate concerns and lift sanctions on Iran as soon as possible. 
Other delegates also underscored the centrality of calm, diplomacy and compromise.
“Pakistan calls on all parties to exercise restraint and refrain from further actions that could further undermine regional peace and stability,” said that country’s delegate.  The Memorandum of Understanding agreed recently in Islamabad offers a “viable road map” to address all outstanding issues through diplomatic means, he said, cautioning:  “Any interruption of this diplomatic process would complicate the issue further.”
Liberia’s delegate said the collective focus must transcend procedural stalemates and focus on the shared responsibility to protect humanity from the catastrophic risks of nuclear proliferation.  In that regard, Somalia’s representative called for the establishment of a Middle East free of nuclear weapons.
Meanwhile, the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Council President for July, said in his national capacity that — even amid diverging opinions among the organ’s members — upholding its smooth functioning is all of their responsibilities.  “The Security Council should be able to continue its work in the spirit of responsibility, mutual respect and constructive dialogue,” he stressed.