At least 1,719 people are 
reported
 to have died after two devastating earthquakes struck northwestern Venezuela last week.


The final casualty count is expected to rise significantly.


Some media outlets 
report
 resident’s growing frustration with the Venezuelan government and its recovery efforts.


Sky News on June 29 
reported
 that the United Nations Coordinator for Humanitarian Affairs in Venezuela was preparing for as many as 10,000 deaths. 


Social media posts, news reports and drone footage have been shared in recent days, proving vital sources for many Venezuelans (both in the country and living abroad) who are searching for information about loved ones who remain missing. 


Social media pages have been set up listing many of those who are yet to be accounted for. Others have contacted Bellingcat asking if apartment blocks relatives were staying in are still standing. 


Bellingcat has received satellite imagery from Planet Labs PBC that shows one the worst affected areas in the country, including collapsed buildings and apartment blocks in La Guaira
.


Readers can move laterally and horizontally to observe the full image in the interactive below as well as zoom in on specific areas to assess the damage. A share button on the top right will copy a shareable link to the zoomed in area.


Scroll and zoom
 to see damage throughout the affected Venezuelan coast. 
Toggle
 between English and Spanish. 
Share
 a link to a specific location by clicking the button on the top right. The before imagery is from Jul 30, 2025 and Dec 12, 2023. After imagery is from Jun 29, 2026.  PlanetScope imagery via Planet Labs PBC.


The high resolution image covers a 14-mile stretch of Venezuela’s northern coast from the towns of Catia La Mar to Caraballeda, which have been among the worst impacted. 


Other areas to be significantly impacted but not included in the imagery above include Caracas, Maracay, Valencia, Barquisimeto and Yaracuy.


We have compared the satellite imagery we obtained with previous images captured before the earthquake to identify which parts of this 14-mile stretch of coastline to show changes since the quakes. 


Readers can toggle between the imagery captured on June 29 (five days after the Jun. 24 quakes) and a composite of reference images taken on Jul. 30, 2025 and Dec. 11, 2023 (before the quakes).


Zooming in on specific areas reveals the scale of the damage.


For example, several buildings seem to have been flattened in the below before and after images showing the Playa Grande area.


Before imagery (left) of Playa Grande is from Jul 30, 2025 and Dec 12, 2023. Imagery from after the earthquake (right) is from Jun 29, 2026.  PlanetScope imagery via Planet Labs PBC.


The Planet Labs imagery also confirms significant destruction in the town of Carabelleda.


Before imagery (left) of Carabelleda is from Jul 30, 2025 and Dec 12, 2023. Imagery from after the earthquake (right) is from Jun 29, 2026.  PlanetScope imagery via Planet Labs PBC.


Another area, Macuto, has been significantly impacted as well.


Before imagery (left) of Macuto is from Jul 30, 2025 and Dec 12, 2023. Imagery from after the earthquake (right) is from Jun 29, 2026.  PlanetScope imagery via Planet Labs PBC.


Footage taken on the ground and posted to social media also displays the devastation.


A minute-long 
video
 filmed on a 500-meter section of José María España Avenue in Carabelleda shows as many as a dozen collapsed buildings, most of them high-rises. This drone 
footage
 gives an aerial look of the destruction of at least six apartment blocks in the same area.


Another 
video shared on social media s
howed a collapsed hotel in Macuto, between Carabelleda and La Guaira.


Other open source information about the damage in cities such as Caracas, Valencia and beyond can be found on 
this site
 where individuals are uploading images and videos detailing damage.


While international rescuers continue to arrive in Venezuela, the threat of aftershocks remains.


Reuters also 
reports
 that engineers fear many buildings that remain standing could be vulnerable and are requesting an audit of state housing.




Carlos Gonzales, Jake Godin and Miguel Ramalho contributed to this report.


Bellingcat is a non-profit and the ability to carry out our work is dependent on the kind support of individual donors. If you would like to support our work, you can do so 
here
. You can also subscribe to our Patreon channel 
here
. Subscribe to our 
Newsletter
 and follow us on Bluesky 
here
, Instagram 
here
, Reddit 
here 
and YouTube 
here
.