EU sanctions ‘extremist’ Israeli settlers in occupied West Bank
EU says the sanctioned individuals and groups violated a range of rights, from the right to physical and mental integrity, to the right to education.
Published On 28 May 2026
28 May 2026
The European Union has sanctioned four entities and three individuals it says are “extremist Israeli settlers” responsible for “serious” human rights abuses against Palestinians in the occupied West Bank.
The EU said they had violated a range of rights, including the rights to physical and mental integrity, privacy and family life, freedom of religion and education.
Recommended Stories 
list of 4 items
end of list
The announcement on Thursday is part of an EU 
sanctions package agreed 
earlier this month to punish 
Israeli settlers
 and Hamas leaders.
The sanctions include the Nachala Settlement Movement and its director, Daniella Weiss. The EU says the group “encourages and facilitates coercive acts that lead to the forced displacement of Palestinians”.
Israeli NGO Regavim and its director, Meir Deutsch, are also on the sanctions list for lobbying “for the demolition of Palestinian property” in order to expand Israel’s control over the entirety of the West Bank, plus the demolition of an EU-funded Palestinian primary school.
Also sanctioned is the Hashomer Yosh NGO and its president, Avichai Suissa for supporting “at least 28 violent outposts and settlements”. It also recruits armed volunteers and provides guards who engage in violent attacks, the EU added.
The Amana cooperative association of the settler movement Gush Emunim was also sanctioned, the EU stating it had likewise “played a key role in initiating, financing, and facilitating at least 30 violent outposts and settlements”.
 
 
Long-awaited sanctions
With Thursday’s additions, the EU said it now sanctions 136 persons and 41 entities from a range of countries under its Global Human Rights Sanctions Regime.
The regime was created in 2020, and applies to acts such as genocide, crimes against humanity and other serious human rights violations or abuses.
The measures targeting Israeli settlers because of violence against Palestinians were long-awaited, having been blocked by the self-styled illiberal government of Hungary’s former premier Viktor Orban.
However, the appointment of new Prime Minister Peter Magyar saw the veto quickly lifted earlier this month.
Israel earlier condemned the sanctions, asserting that Jews have the right to settle in the occupied West Bank, despite that being in 
violation of international law.
In 2025, the expansion of Israeli settlements reached its highest level since at least 2017, when the United Nations began tracking data.
Since the start of Israel’s genocidal war on Gaza, the West Bank has been gripped by almost daily violence involving Israeli troops and settlers. More than 1,000 Palestinians have been killed in the territory, according to the UN.