Penny Wong welcomes US-Iran peace deal
The Australian government has welcomed the announcement of a peace deal to end the US and Iran conflict and reopen the strait of Hormuz.
The foreign minister, 
Penny Wong
, said:


double quotation mark
We welcome President Trump and Pakistan’s announcement of an agreement, including to reopen the strait of Hormuz. Australia has long called for de-escalation and an end to the conflict, including in Lebanon. As we have said, the longer this war goes on, the greater the impact will be.


Read the latest on what we know so far about the pending deal here:
Share
Updated at 
19.29 EDT
Key events
Woman injured in shark attack remains in critical but stable condition
The 35-year-old woman injured by a shark at Sydney’s Coogee beach yesterday remains in hospital in critical but stable condition, a spokesperson for St Vincent’s hospital confirmed this morning.
You can read more here:
Share
Updated at 
19.45 EDT
Anthony Albanese welcomes US-Iran agreement, calls for ‘continued restraint’
The prime minister and foreign minister have issued a lengthier statement welcoming the agreement made by the US and Iran, and called for continued restraint to avoid further escalation.
President 
Donald Trump
 made the announcement he had signed a deal this morning, saying the strait of Hormuz would be reopened.
Anthony Albanese
 and 
Penny Wong
 said a full recovery from the impact of the closure to date will take time, and that the government will continue to “do all we can to shield Australians from the worst impacts of this conflict”. \
They said Australia has more fuel in its reserves than ever.


double quotation mark
Continued restraint and constructive engagement will be essential to prevent further escalation and secure a lasting agreement. We are pleased the agreement between the US and Iran includes steps to reopening the Strait of Hormuz …


We encourage all parties to use this opportunity to pursue a durable and lasting peace through dialogue and diplomacy. Iran must address longstanding concerns about its nuclear program and the threat it poses to international security.


The terms of the deal remain unknown. Read more 
here
.
Anthony Albanese and Penny Wong.
 Photograph: Lukas Coch/EPA
Share
Updated at 
19.41 EDT
University students report ‘serious’ free speech problem in new survey
At least one-in-five students at every public university in Australia don’t feel free to express their views on campus, according to a new analysis of government survey data.
AAP
 reports the findings come from a report by the Liberal-aligned 
Menzies Research Centre
, based on responses to the federal government’s annual Student Experiences Survey.
The survey has asked higher education students about freedom of expression since 2021 but university-level results have not previously been released.
The report says the trend has worsened in recent years and universities should be held accountable for how free students feel in expressing themselves.
In 2024, 28.3% of domestic undergraduate students did not agree that they were free to express their views at university. Among postgraduates, 32.5% reported the same.
This is up from 24% among undergraduates and 28% among postgraduates in 2021.
Penny Wong welcomes US-Iran peace deal
The Australian government has welcomed the announcement of a peace deal to end the US and Iran conflict and reopen the strait of Hormuz.
The foreign minister, 
Penny Wong
, said:


double quotation mark
We welcome President Trump and Pakistan’s announcement of an agreement, including to reopen the strait of Hormuz. Australia has long called for de-escalation and an end to the conflict, including in Lebanon. As we have said, the longer this war goes on, the greater the impact will be.


Read the latest on what we know so far about the pending deal here:
Share
Updated at 
19.29 EDT
Seven arrests at Brisbane Palestine rally, including flotilla participant
Seven protesters, including a participant in last month’s Global Sumud Flotilla, were arrested at a Justice for Palestine rally yesterday.
All seven were arrested for allegedly saying the phrase “from the river to the sea” or for holding a sign bearing the expression.
Spokesperson 
Remah Naji
 said a mooted lawsuit by Justice for Palestine was intended to test whether police would still enforce a ban on saying the phrase passed into law earlier this year. She said many people displayed or said the banned phrases at a rally the weekend before without being arrested.
“Today we’re going to test these laws again. We have people who are willing to challenge the laws with the banned expressions, because we understand our responsibility here as people with freedoms and the right and the duty to speak out against those crimes (of Israel),” she said.
Flotilla participant 
Sam Watson
 was the first arrested, after a brief speech.
Naji said the mooted high court challenge against the laws was still on foot, and is expected to be filed mid-July.
A spokesperson for the Queensland police said about 300 people attended the rally in King George Square.
“The QPS acknowledges the overall peaceful behaviour of protesters in Brisbane City today, 14 June,” the spokesperson said.


double quotation mark
Seven people were charged with recital, distribution, publication or display of prohibited expressions.


Share
Updated at 
19.05 EDT
Lyle Shelton loses challenge against vilification ruling
Conservative commentator 
Lyle Shelton
 has lost a legal challenge against a six-year old vilification ruling.
The case dates to a January 2020 blog post by Shelton about two Drag Queen story time performers from Brisbane.
“Have we learned nothing from creeps like Harvey Weinstein, Jeffrey Epstein and Prince Andrew?” he blogged.
The performers complained to the state’s human rights commission that the posts amounted to vilification under the state’s anti-discrimination act.
The 
Queensland Civil and Administrative
 tribunal dismissed their complaint in 2023 partly on the basis that transphobia and homophobia “lives in the past” meaning “any such incitement it could not be vilification” under the act. That judgement was set aside earlier this year by the same court.
Shelton challenged the latter decision in a judicial review at the Supreme Court, but on Friday the court ruled against him. The case will now return to the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal.
Little evidence that shark culls improve beach safety, experts say
Experts warn there is little evidence shark culls keep ocean-goers safer following the latest shocking encounter at a busy city beach, AAP reports.
A woman, 35, was swimming about 30 meters offshore at Coogee beach in 
Sydney
 when she was bitten by a shark on Saturday. She remained in critical but stable condition on Sunday.
A great white shark, which is a protected species, is thought to have been responsible. It follows a cluster of attacks nationwide, including several bull shark bites in Sydney Harbour.
The latest incident has reignited calls for culls to protect swimmers, which NSW Agriculture Minister 
Tara Moriarty
 has not expressly ruled out.
Adelaide University program director of environmental science 
Brianna Le Brusque
 said harmful encounters with the predators were tragic and cull discussions an understandable response.
But she said there was no science on how many animals would need to be removed to keep swimmers safe nor evidence it would meaningfully improve community safety.
Surveillance methods to alert swimmers were more effective, though complicated by a flight path keeping drones out of the air around Coogee.
Share
Updated at 
18.29 EDT
Nearly $200m given to industry in zero-interest government loans amid Middle East conflict
The federal government’s 
Economic Resilience Program
 has provided nearly $200m in zero-interest loans since its announcement last month.
The program offers $1bn in zero-interest loans for industrial manufacturing and critical supply chains impacted by market disruptions caused by the conflict in the Middle East.
In an update provided on Monday, more than 200 businesses have signed up for the zero-interest loans, totalling almost $195m.
The industry and innovation minister, 
Tim Ayres
, said more than three-quarters of the loans have been for under $1m.
Ayres said:


double quotation mark
Firms in crucial sectors like freight and logistics, fuel, plastics and fertiliser are receiving vital support from the National Reconstruction Fund in partnership with Australian banks.


Share
Updated at 
18.13 EDT
Barnaby Joyce says One Nation's fundraised money to go towards ad campaign
One Nation’s 
Barnaby Joyce
 is speaking now, saying the millions in fundraising the party has raised in recent days will go towards “the removal of the 
Labor party
 because they have not been good for Australia”.
Joyce spoke to RN, saying the money would largely go to an advertising campaign in the lead up to the next election.
He said the party would not get “carried away”, saying he’s “very aware of hubris” and would solely focus on the “here and now”:


double quotation mark
The election is still somewhere away, and polls are indicators, not votes.


Share
Updated at 
18.14 EDT
Assistant treasurer says One Nation’s rise reflects ‘frustration’ of many people
Daniel Mulino
, the assistant treasurer, said One Nation’s rise began “well before” the latest federal budget and reflected a “frustration on the part of many people” at the way the system is working for them.
Mulino spoke to RN Breakfast this morning as Pauline Hanson’s party continues to surge in the polls. He said:


double quotation mark
I think it, for me, reflects a frustration on the part of many people at the way the system is working for them and the fact that they’re feeling pressures on a number of fronts: pressures from cost of living, pressures from Increasingly uncertain global economy and political situation.


What I’d say about One Nation is that they are very good at identifying grievances. They’re not very good at solutions. And in fact, Pauline Hanson’s voting record over recent years has often been to the detriment of people seeking pay rises, to the detriment of workers’ rights. And so that’s something which, as that comes to light more, I think people will judge that in due course.


Good morning, 
Nick Visser 
here once again as we start a new week. Here’s what’s on deck:
Experts say there is little evidence for a shark cull after an attack at one of Sydney’s most popular beaches this weekend. They say there is no science on how many animals would need to be removed to keep swimmers safe, nor evidence it would meaningfully improve safety.
At least one in five students at Australian public universities don’t feel free to express their views on campus, according to a new analysis. The survey asked students about free speech on campuses, but found the trend has worsened in recent years and advised universities should be held accountable for how students feel in expressing themselves.
The federal government has provided almost $200m in no-interest loans to help support manufacturing supply chains since disruptions in the Middle East began. More than 200 businesses have signed up for the program.
Stick with us.