Ukrainian drones have hit several locations across Moscow in Kyiv’s biggest air raid on the city since the start of Russia’s full-scale invasion, setting a major ⁠oil refinery on fire and forcing evacuations at the country’s largest airport.
The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, described the attack as a response to Russia’s striking of a 
historic Kyiv monastery complex
 earlier this week.
“We do not want this war and never did,” Zelenskyy said in a voice message to journalists. “But if 
Ukraine
 is going to burn, your Moscow will burn too … It is time to end the aggression, time to end this war.”
The scale of the long-range attack, apparently designed to shut down operations at the key oil refinery in the Kapotno area, caught most people by surprise in a city that does not typically warn residents with air raid alarms, and prompted panicked messages on social media.
Footage posted online showed three plumes of smoke rising from the Kapotno refinery. The strike was the second in two days on the facility.
The refinery, one of Moscow’s most important energy facilities, supplies up to 40% of the capital’s petrol and about 50% of its diesel fuel.
Locator
Russia said its ⁠air defence systems ​intercepted and ⁠destroyed 555 Ukrainian drones over ⁠multiple ​regions ‌overnight. The number actually shot down could not be independently confirmed.
Vladimir Putin is in Kazan, 430 miles (700km) east of Moscow, hosting leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations as Russia seeks to bolster business and other ties.
Kyiv was hit this week by a 
major strike of ballistic missiles and drones
 in a marked escalation of the air war. Putin had warned of impending “systemic strikes” on Ukraine.
The Moscow attack came hours after Zelenskyy said he had held “an important coordination call” with the presidents of the US and France and had won vital pledges of further support from this week’s international G7 summit.
Zelenskyy was expected to hold talks in Brussels on Thursday with Nato and EU leaders, including about the possibility of a system to defend against ballistic missiles. Russia has repeatedly struck Ukraine with those types of missiles, which air defences struggle to counter.
The British defence secretary, Dan Jarvis, announced on Thursday at a meeting of western allies in Brussels that the UK would pay £750m to supply Kyiv with a further 150,000 Ukrainian-made drones and more than 350 air defence missiles.
The funding comes from a £2.26bn loan taken out against the interest generated by Russian central bank assets frozen since the start of the full-scale invasion in 2022.
Building on fire following Ukrainian drone attack in Moscow on Thursday.
 Photograph: Social media/Reuters
Footage of the Moscow strikes appeared to show the use of Ukrainian Bars hybrid drone-cruise missiles, first used last year. They had been believed to have a range of 600-800km, designed for precision targeting, but their use against Moscow would suggest a longer range.
Ukraine is rapidly catching up with Russia in its ability to mass-produce long-range strike weapons. Kyiv has stepped up its drone strikes on Russia in recent months, hitting oil refineries that fund Moscow’s war chest, as diplomatic talks on ending the conflict remain stalled.
Sergei Sobyanin, Moscow’s mayor, said: “Air defence forces are continuing to repel a large-scale attack. Several drones managed to reach the [Moscow oil refinery].” He claimed ‌about 180 drones heading for the capital were downed.
Sobyanin said emergency crews were working at the site and he also reported damage to Sadovod shopping centre in the south-eastern part of the city. At least seven drones appear to have beaten Russia’s air defences to strike targets in the city.
Footage online appeared to show a Russian portable air defence system operator attempting to shoot down a Ukrainian strike drone moments before it struck the Moscow oil refinery.
Traffic was halted ​on Moscow’s ring road near ⁠the refinery, the broadcaster RIA ​cited ‌the ​interior ministry ​as saying, while air traffic was disrupted at Vnukovo, Sheremetyevo and Zhukovsky airports.
Footage on social media appeared to show a strike on a high-rise building in Zhukovsky district. Sheremetyevo, Moscow’s busiest airport, suspended flights and carried out evacuations. Some people sought shelter in the parking area, the airport said.
In the surrounding ‌Moscow region, a high-rise residential building, an industrial facility and a number of private houses were damaged in the drone attack, the regional governor said.
A strike on Tuesday was understood to have already halted operations at the Kapotno refinery, adding to widespread damage to Russian energy facilities and extending a ​fuel crisis deeper into the country.
Russia, the world’s third biggest oil producer and ‌a major oil and fuel exporter, is to import fuel by sea this month as it seeks to manage a shortage after extensive Ukrainian drone attacks on its refineries.
Russian hardliners called for Moscow to retaliate, with some urging the Kremlin to consider using nuclear weapons against Ukraine.
“What else has to happen before we start fighting for real?” wrote the ultraconservative billionaire Konstantin Malofeev on Telegram. “Why aren’t we using the nuclear weapons that our ancestors created and stockpiled through the efforts of the entire country precisely for moments like this?”
Andrey Gurulyov, a retired lieutenant general and state duma deputy, called for Russia to “strike the enemy mercilessly” in response to the attack. “We need to strengthen our air defence system, but most importantly, we need to hit the enemy,” he told RTVI. “Hit the enemy mercilessly, without overthinking it.”
Kyiv came under air attack this week as Russia launched ballistic missiles at the Ukrainian capital, city officials said, with residents urged to take shelter. Authorities in the north-eastern Ukrainian city of Sumy said one person was killed in a drone attack there. Airstrike alerts were issued for most of Ukraine’s territory.
One person was killed in the Ukrainian ​city of Enerhodar, where most of ‌the staff of the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia ​nuclear power plant live, said the Russian-installed mayor, Maksim ​Pukhov. In Russia’s Belgorod border region, officials said a Ukrainian drone strike killed one man in his car.
On Wednesday, Moscow accused Ukraine of 
attacking a bus carrying Belarusian children
, an accusation Kyiv said was false. In the southern Russian region of Rostov, a Ukrainian drone attack killed one person and caused a fire at two commercial facilities, officials said. Russia and Ukraine deny deliberately targeting civilians.
Additional reporting by Dan Sabbagh; Reuters and AP contributed to this report