1 No.115 – April 2024  GEOGLAM Crop Monitor 
 
Overview:  
At the end of April , overall conditions are positive for wheat, 
maize, rice, and soybeans. In the Northern Hemisphere, 
conditions are generally favourable; however, rainfall is needed 
in parts of Europe and in the US. For maize, harvesting is 
ongoing in the Southern Hemisphere, and sowing is expanding 
in the Northern Hemisphere. Rice 
conditions are mostly 
favourable as harvests progress in South and Southeast Asia 
and South America . For soybeans, harvesting is progressing 
with good yields in the Southern Hemisphere as sowing ramps 
up in the Northern Hemisphere. 
The Crop Monitor is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global initiative.  
 
                    
                
Contents:  
Crop Conditions & Forecasts at a Glance …………..…… ….….…... 2  
Wheat Conditions………………………….….…………. …….………….…….. 3 
Maize Conditions………………………………………………………….………. 4  
Rice Conditions……………………………………………………………………... 5 
Soybean Conditions………………… ..……………………………….…..…….. 6 
Climate Forecasts……………………………… .……….…………………….….. 7 
Appendix I –Terminology & Definitions…………………….……….. 12 
Appendix II – Crop Season Specific Maps…….……..………………. 14 
Assessment based on information as of April 28th, 2026 
  
 
     
www.cropmonitor.org No. 138 – May 2026
2 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Conditions at a Glance (as of April 28th) 
Global crop condition map synthesizing  information for all four AMIS crops as of April  28th, 2026. Crop conditions over the main growing areas for 
wheat, maize, rice, and soybean are based on a combination of national and regional crop analyst inputs and  earth observation data. Crops under 
non-favourable conditions are displayed on the map using their crop symbols. 
Crop Conditions at a Glance 
Wheat – In the Northern Hemisphere, conditions are 
generally favourable; however, rainfall is needed in parts 
of Europe and in the US. 
Maize – Conditions are favourable as harvesting is 
ongoing in the Southern Hemisphere and sowing is 
expanding in the Northern Hemisphere. 
Rice – Global conditions are mostly favourable as harvests 
progress in South and Southeast Asia and South America. 
Soybeans – Harvesting is progressing with good yields in 
the Southern Hemisphere as sowing ramps up in the 
Northern Hemisphere. 
 
Forecasts at a Glance 
Climate Influences – El Niño conditions are confidently 
forecast from mid-2026 to early 2027. El Niño conditions 
may develop soon—during May to July 2026 (61 percent 
chance)—and could become a moderate or strong event.  
For further details, see page 7. 
Australia – The May outlook indicates likely below -
average precipitation and above -average maximum 
temperatures across much of the country . For further 
details, see page 9. 
India – The forecast for the 2026 Southwest Monsoon 
season (June – September) indicates likely below-average 
precipitation and above -average temperatures across 
most of the country. For further details, see page 10. 
United States  – The May outlook indicates likely 
expansion of drought conditions in the Pacific Northwest 
and Northern Plains, while improvement or removal in the 
Western Gulf Coast Region . For further details, see page 
11. 
 
While the Crop Monitor for AMIS is primarily focused on documenting crop conditions based on environmental factors, conflict and socio-economic factors 
are very likely to negatively impact yields and the ability to cultivate or harvest crops.
3 No.138 – May 2026  GEOGLAM Crop Monitor 
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Wheat Conditions for AMIS Countries 
 
Wheat crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop condition 
information is based on information as of April 28th, 2026. Where crops are in conditions other than favourable, the climatic drivers responsible for 
those conditions are displayed. Crop Season Specific Maps can be found in Appendix 2. 
 
Wheat: In the EU, winter wheat is under generally 
favourable conditions; however, additional rainfall is 
needed in central and eastern Europe to avoid rapid 
deterioration in crop conditions before entering the 
reproductive stages. In Türkiye , conditions remain 
favourable for winter wheat. In Ukraine, winter wheat 
is under favourable conditions despite frequent and 
prolonged frosts in April. In the Russian Federation , 
winter wheat is under favourable conditions. Spring 
wheat sowing is ongoing, albeit slowed by recent cold 
and wet weather. In Kazakhstan, winter wheat 
continues under favourable conditions. In China, 
winter wheat develops under favourable conditions as 
spring wheat sowing continues. In India , the harvest 
is wrapping up under favourable conditions despite 
some localized damage from late-season rainfall and 
hail. In the US, drought continues to expand across winter wheat areas. Spring wheat sowing picks up pace. In 
Canada, conditions have improved for winter wheat owing to recent above-average precipitation in Ontario and 
Quebec. In Australia, sowing is just beginning. 
 
For detailed description of the pie chart please see box on page 6.
4 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Maize Conditions for AMIS Countries 
 
Maize crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop condition 
information is based on information as of April 28th, 2026. Where crops are in conditions other than favourable, the climatic drivers responsible for 
those conditions are displayed. Crop Season Specific Maps can be found in Appendix 2. 
 
Maize: In Brazil, the harvest of the spring -planted 
crop (smaller season) is progressing under mostly 
exceptional conditions. The summer -planted crop 
(larger season) is in mostly favourable conditions; 
however, a lack of rainfall and high temperatures is 
negatively impacting crops in the Southeast region. In 
Argentina, the harvest of early-planted crops (larger 
season) slows as priority shifts to the soybean harvest. 
The late- planted crop (smaller season) continues 
through the grain- filling stage under favorable 
conditions. In South Africa , harvest is progressing 
under mostly favourable to exceptional conditions. In 
India, the harvest of the Rabi crop (smaller season) is 
wrapping up under favorable conditions. In 
Indonesia, the harvest of the wet -season crop 
continues as sowing of the dry-season crop begins. In 
the US, sowing is progressing, with an expected reduction in total sown area compared to last year. In Mexico, 
conditions are favorable for the autumn -winter season (smaller season). In China, sowing of spring -maize is 
continuing throughout the country. In the EU, sowing is ongoing under favorable conditions. In Ukraine, sowing 
is beginning. In the Russian Federation, sowing is beginning. 
 
For detailed description of the pie chart please see box on page 6.
5 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Rice Conditions for AMIS Countries 
 
Rice crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop condition 
information is based on information as of April 28th, 2026. Where crops are in conditions other than favourable, the climatic drivers responsible for 
those conditions are displayed. Crop Season Specific Maps can be found in Appendix 2. 
 
Rice: In China, the early double-crop rice (smallest 
season) is developing as the sowing of single-season 
rice (largest season) begins. In India , the harvest is 
progressing for the Rabi crop as the Summer crop 
continues to develop. In Bangladesh , harvesting of 
the Boro crop (largest season) advances in a race 
against rising waters from heavy rains in the low-lying 
haor regions of the northeast. Sowing continues for 
the Aus crop (smallest season). In Indonesia , 
harvesting of wet -season rice continues as sowing 
begins for dry-season rice. In Viet Nam, winter-spring 
(dry-season) rice is under favourable conditions 
across the country as harvesting continues in the 
south and the sowing of summer- autumn (wet -
season) rice begins. In Thailand, harvesting continues 
for dry-season rice with an expected increase in yields 
compared to last season, albeit with a reduction in total sown area. In the Philippines, dry-season rice harvesting 
is ongoing with a slight reduction in yields compared to last year. In Brazil, the harvest is continuing. 
 
For detailed description of the pie chart please see box on page 6.
6 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Soybean Conditions for AMIS Countries 
 
Soybean crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on  national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on information as of April 28th, 2026. Where crops are in conditions other than favourable , the climatic drivers 
responsible for those conditions are displayed. Crop Season Specific Maps can be found in Appendix 2. 
 
Soybeans: In Brazil, the harvest is wrapping up 
under exceptional conditions in the Central -West, 
Southeast, and Northern regions, thanks to mostly 
good weather throughout the season. In Argentina , 
harvesting is progressing for the early -planting crop 
(larger season) despite delays from recent heavy 
rainfall. Yields are good, supported by timely rainfall 
since mid -February. The late- planted crop (smaller 
season) is reaching maturity under favorable  
conditions, with harvest just beginning in the north. In 
South Africa, harvest is ongoing with above-average 
yields expected across most of the country, with an 
increase in total sown area compared to last year and 
the five-year average. In the US, sowing is ramping up 
under generally favorable conditions, with an 
expected increase in total sown area compared to last 
year. In Ukraine , sowing is just beginning under 
favorable conditions, with an increase in total sown 
area expected compared to last year. 
 
 
 
Pie chart description: Each slice represents a country's share of total AMIS production (5 -year average). Main producing countries (representing 95 
percent of production) are shown individually, with the remaining 5 percent grouped into the “Other AMIS Countries” category. The proportion within 
each national slice is coloured according to the crop conditions within a specific growing area; grey indicates that the resp ective area is out of season. 
Sections within each slide are weighted by the sub -national production statistics (5 -year average) of the respective country. The section within each 
national slice also accounts for multiple cropping seasons (i.e., spring and winter wheat). When conditions are other than  favourable, icons are added 
that provide information on the key climatic drivers affecting conditions. 
 
 
For detailed description of the pie chart please see box below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Information on crop conditions in non-AMIS 
countries can be found in the GEOGLAM Crop 
Monitor for Early Warning
7 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Climate Influences: El Niño Watch 
 
Neutral ENSO conditions are present. El Niño conditions are confidently forecast from mid- 2026 to early 2027. El Niño 
conditions may develop soon — during May to July 2026 (61 percent chance) — and could become a moderate or strong event. 
According to the April 2026 NOAA CPC ENSO outlook, there is an 87 to 92 percent chance of El Niño conditions from July 2026 
to January 2027. The likelihood of extreme conditions during the coming year will increase as El Niño warms global 
temperatures. 
 
El Niño events tend to enhance rainfall in Central Asia, southern North America, south-eastern South America, southern Europe, 
eastern and southern East Africa, and southern and eastern China. Drier -than-average conditions tend to occur in Central 
America, the Caribbean, northern South America, parts of western and northern East Africa, the Sahel region, Southern Africa, 
India, Northern China, the Maritime Continent, and Australia. 
 
Location and timing of likely above- and below-average precipitation related to El Niño events. Based upon observed precipitation during 22 El Niño events since 1950, 
wet and dry correspond to a statistically significant increase in the frequency of precipitation in the upper and lower thirds of historical values, respectively. Statistical 
significance at the 95% level is based on the resampling of precipitation during neutral El Niño-Southern Oscillation conditions. Source: FEWS NET & NOAA & CHC 
 
During May 2026, above -average temperatures are forecast in West Africa, East Africa, central Southern Africa and 
Madagascar, central and northern Asia, Southeast Asia, eastern Australia, western Canada, the western United States, northern 
Mexico, Central America, the Caribbean, and northern and central South America
. 
 
Source: UCSB Climate Hazards Center 
Average temperature anomaly forecast for the next 30 days starting on 26 March 2026, from four Subseasonal Consortium 
(SubC) models. SubC data accessed from the IRI Data Library. Map source: UCSB Climate Hazards Center
8 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Global Two-week Precipitation Forecast 
 
The two-week forecast (Figure 1) shows a chance of above -average precipitation over central Mexico, northern and 
northeast Brazil, southern Norway, southwestern Sweden, Estonia, eastern Latvia, northeastern Lithuania, central 
Russia, southern South Sudan, northern and western Uganda, eastern and central Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
northern Angola, northcentral South Africa, western Kazakhstan, northwestern Turkmenistan, western Uzbekistan, 
southern China, Indonesia, and eastern Australia. 
 
There is also a risk of below -average precipitation over central and western Canada, western Cuba, southern 
Guatemala, Honduras, eastern El Salvador, western Nicaragua, southern Costa Rica, northern Colombia, Venezuela, 
Guyana, southeastern Bolivia, Paragu ay, southern Brazil, Uruguay, northern and central Argentina, southern Chile, 
Portugal, Spain, southern Italy, southern Albania, southern Greece, northern Russian Federation, western Türkiye, Syria, 
northern Morocco, northern Algeria, southern Senegal, The  Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, 
southern Mali, western and southern Burkina Faso, northern Nigeria, southeastern Chad, western Ethiopia, 
northeastern Tanzania, northern Madagascar, western South Africa, northern and eastern Kazakhsta n, central 
Uzbekistan, southern Mongolia, northern and southwestern China, central India, Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Viet Nam, 
Cambodia, southern Japan, and the central and southern Philippines. 
 
Figure 1: IRI SubX Precipitation Biweekly Probability Forecast for 9 – 22 May, issued on 1 May 2026. The forecast  is based on statistically 
calibrated tercile category forecasts from three SubX models. Source: IRI Subseasonal Forecasts Maproom
9 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Australia Outlook 
The May 2026 outlook indicates likely below-average precipitation over parts of Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, 
South Australia, northern Tanzania, and southwestern Western Australia. During this time, maximum temperatures are likely 
to be above-average over most of the country except for parts of Western Australia, northern Queensland, Tasmania, and 
the northern areas of the Northern Territory. Minimum temperatures are likely to be above-average over Western Australia, 
Tasmania, and coastal regions of South Australia, Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland.  
May 2026 Outlook 
 
 
Top: April 2026 precipitation anomaly forecast. Bottom  Left: April 2026 maximum temperature probability forecast. Bottom Right: April 2026  
minimum temperature probability forecast. Maps from the India Meteorological Department
10 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
India Outlook 
The forecast for the 2026 Southwest Monsoon Season (June –  September) precipitation from the India Meteorological 
Department indicates that the rainfall for the country will likely be below -average, 92% (±5%) of the long -term average 
(1971-2020). The primary driver for the forecasted reduction in precipitation is the likely development of El Niño during the 
season, as El Niño tends to suppress precipitation in South Asia . Regionally, the only areas currently forecasted to receive 
above-average precipitation are in the Northwest region, the Northeast region, and par ts of the Southcentral region. 
During this time, both maximum daytime and minimum overnight temperatures are forecasted  to be above -average 
according to WMO. 
2026 Southwest Monsoon Season Outlook 
 
Probability forecast of the tercile categories for the 2026 Southwest Monsoon season( June –  September). Maps from the India Meteorological 
Department
11 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
United States Outlook 
The May 2026 precipitation forecast indicates likely above-average precipitation in New Mexico, southeastern Arizona, 
central and southern Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, and southwestern Alabama, while below -average precipitation is likely 
over the Pacific Northwest, Northern and Central Plains, and the western and northwestern Corn Belt . During this time, 
temperatures are likely to be above- average over the western half of the US and Florida, with the highest likelihood over 
the Pacific Northwest, while below -average temperatures are likely over the central and eastern Corn Belt and the Mi d-
Atlantic region. 
 
The impacts of May’s weather outlook are the likely continuation of drought over the western US and most of the Southeast, 
while drought is likely to expand over parts of the Pacific Northwest and the Northern Plains . At the same time, drought 
conditions are likely to improve or be removed over parts of eastern Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, and southwestern 
Alabama.  
 
May 2026 Outlook 
 
 
 
 
Upper Left: May 2026 precipitation outlook issued on 30 April 2026. Upper Right: May 2026 temperature outlook issued on 30 April 2026. Bottom: 
May 2026 drought outlook released on 30 April 2026. Maps from NOAA CPC and NOAA/National Weather Service, National Centers for Environmental 
Prediction, and Climate Prediction Center.
12 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Appendix 1: Terminology & Definitions 
 
Crop Conditions: 
Exceptional: Conditions are much better than average* at the time of reporting. This label is only used during 
the grain-filling through the harvest stages. 
Favourable: Conditions range from slightly lower to slightly better than average* at reporting time.  
Watch: Conditions are close to average* but there is a potential risk to final production. The crop can still 
recover to average or near average conditions if the ground situation improves. This label is only used during 
the planting-early vegetative, and vegetative-reproductive stages. 
Poor: Crop conditions are well below average*. Crop yields are likely to be more than 5% below average. This 
is only used when conditions are not likely to be able to recover, and an impact on production is likely.  
Out of Season: Crops are not currently planted or in development during this time. 
No Data: No reliable source of data is available at this time. 
*” Average” refers to the average conditions over the past 5 years. 
 
 
Drivers: 
These represent the key climatic, environmental, and anthropomorphic drivers that are having an impact on crop 
condition status. They result in production impacts and can act as either positive or negative drivers of crop 
conditions. 
Wet: Wetter than average (includes waterlogging and floods). 
Dry: Drier than average. 
Hot: Hotter than average. 
Cold: Cooler than average or risk of frost damage. 
Extreme Events: A catch-all for all other climate risks (i.e., hurricane, typhoon, frost, hail, winter kill, wind damage, 
etc.). When this category is used, the analyst will also specify the type of extreme event in the text. 
Delayed-Onset: Late start of the season. 
Pest & Disease: Destructive insects, birds, animals, or plant disease. 
Socio-economic: Social or economic factors that impact crop conditions (i.e., policy changes, agricultural subsidies, 
government intervention, agricultural inputs, etc.) 
Conflict: Armed conflict or civil unrest that is preventing the planting, working, or harvesting of the fields by the 
farmers.
13 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Crop Season Nomenclature: 
In countries that contain multiple cropping seasons for the same crop, the following chart identifies the national season nam e 
associated with each crop season within the Crop Monitor.  Within the Crop Monitor for AMIS countries, the larger producing s eason 
(based upon the most recent 5 years of statistics) has been assigned to the first season.
14 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Appendix 2: Crop Season-Specific Maps 
 
 
Winter wheat crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on information as of April  28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions , the climatic drivers 
responsible for those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of the life 
cycle the crops are currently in for each area. 
 
 
Spring wheat crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on  national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on information as of April  28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions , the climatic drivers 
responsible for those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of the life 
cycle the crops are currently in for each area.
15 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
 
Maize 1 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on  national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on information as of April  28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions , the climatic drivers 
responsible for those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of the life 
cycle the crops are currently in for each area. 
 
 
Maize 2 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on  national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on information as of April  28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions , the climatic drivers 
responsible for those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of the life 
cycle the crops are currently in for each area.
16 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
 
Rice 1 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop condition 
information is based on  information as of April  28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions , the climatic drivers responsible for 
those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of  the life cycle the crops 
are currently in for each area. 
 
 
 
Rice 2 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop condition 
information is based on  information as of April  28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions , the climatic drivers responsible for 
those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of  the life cycle the crops 
are currently in for each area.
17 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
 
Rice 3 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop condition 
information is based on  information as of April  28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions , the climatic drivers responsible for 
those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of  the life cycle the crops 
are currently in for each area. 
 
 
Soybean 1 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on  national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on information as of April  28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions , the climatic drivers 
responsible for those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of the life 
cycle the crops are currently in for each area.
18 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
 
Soybean 2 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on  national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on information as of April  28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions , the climatic drivers 
responsible for those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of the life 
cycle the crops are currently in for each area.
19 | No. 138 – May 2026                                            
 
 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Crop Monitor is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global initiative.  
Prepared by members of the GEOGLAM Community of Practice  
Coordinated by the University of Maryland with funding from NASA Harvest  
Climatic Influences by Climate Hazards Center of UC Santa Barbara  
 
 
2026 Crop Monitor for AMIS release dates:  
5 April, 5 April, 2 April, 7 May, 4 June, 2 July, 6 August , 3 September , 1 October , 5 November , 3 December  
 
Cover p hoto courtesy of Brian Barker 
 
https://cropmonitor.org/  
@GEOCropMonitor  
 
 
 
 
 
Sources and Disclaimers: The Crop Monitor assessment is conducted by GEOGLAM with inputs from the following partners (in 
alphabetical order): Argentina (Buenos Aires Grains Exchange, MAGyP), Asia Rice Countries (AFSIS, ASEAN+3 & Asia RiCE), 
Australia (ABARES & CSIRO), Brazil (CONAB & INPE), Canada (AAFC), China (CAS), EU (EC JRC MARS), Gro Intelligence, India 
(NCFC), Indonesia (LAPAN & MOA), International (CIMMYT, FAO GIEWS, IFPRI & IRRI), Japan (JAXA, MAFF), Mexico (SIAP), 
Russian Federation (IKI), South Africa (ARC & CSIR & GeoTerraImage & SANSA), Thailand (GISTDA & OAE), Ukraine (NASU-NSAU 
& UHMC), USA (NASA, UMD, USGS – FEWS NET, USDA (FAS, NASS)), Viet Nam (VAST & VIMHE-MARD). The findings and 
conclusions in this joint multiagency report are consensual statements from the GEOGLAM experts, and do not necessarily 
reflect those of the individual agencies represented by these experts. 
More detailed information on the GEOGLAM crop assessments is available at https://cropmonitor.org 
Sources & Disclaimer