Insecurity Insight – Monitoring incidents around the world affecting aid, health care, education, and protection. 
 
 
Reporting Sexual Violence  
Monthly News Brief   
June 2026  
  
 
 
This News Brief bears testimony to the brave survivors who speak about sexual violence by state bodies or conflict actors. 
Most events of violence are never reported. This compilation is neither complete nor representative of the extent or nature of 
sexual violence in general. It brings together dispersed accounts about survivors from around the world who broke the silence.  
Past editions: May, April; March; February; January; December: November; October; September; August; July; June; 
May; April; March; February; January; December; November; October; September; August; July; All 
Help support our work by sharing this resource with your networks. Please copy and paste this link: https://bit.ly/Jun2026SV 
Contact us for data enquiries.  
 
Developments in June 2026 
Chad: As reported in June 2026, an internal investigation by Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) revealed widespread sexual 
exploitation and abuse of Sudanese refugee women and underage girls by local and international staff. Survivors were 
reportedly coerced into exchanging sex for food, water, employment, and other basic necessities. The findings highlight the 
heightened vulnerability of displaced women and girls to sexual exploitation by humanitarian personnel and underscore the 
urgent need for robust safeguarding measures, survivor-centred reporting and support mechanisms, and accountability to 
prevent and respond to sexual exploitation and abuse in humanitarian settings. See Chad section for more details.  
Data collected by Insecurity Insight shows that these incidents are not isolated. Cases of aid workers abusing their positions 
to sexually exploit and abuse people in their care have been publicly reported in Burkina Faso, the DRC and Sudan over 
several years and across different humanitarian settings. Reported abuses include demands for sex in exchange for food, 
shelter, aid registration or access to humanitarian assistance, particularly affecting displaced women and girls living in camps 
or other precarious conditions. Available reporting has implicated both national and international humanitarian staff, including 
employees of UN agencies and international NGOs, highlighting that sexual exploitation and abuse is not confined to 
individual organisations or emergency responses. These incidents demonstrate how unequal power dynamics, dependence 
on humanitarian assistance and weak accountability mechanisms can create opportunities for exploitation, particularly during 
large-scale displacement crises.  
 
Myanmar: In June 2026, reports from Magway, Bago, and Chin indicate a pattern of conflict -related sexual violence by 
Myanmar military and Military Council personnel against women, underscoring the continued use of sexual violence as a tool 
of intimidation and abuse  in conflict-affected areas. In Magway region, military personnel reportedly raped and killed an 
unspecified number of women during a prolonged military raid in Pakokku township, raped two women during a military 
operation in Salin township, and r aped another woman in Chauk township. In Bago region, a 28 -year-old woman who had 
been forcibly conscripted as a cook for the military was reportedly raped and killed by military personnel. In Chin state, a 
woman was reportedly subjected to an attempted rape at gunpoint by a Military Council member after being forcibly removed 
from her home. These incidents highlight the heightened vulnerability of women and girls in areas affected by military 
operations and reinforce urgent calls for accountability, surviv or-centred support services, and strengthened protection 
measures. See Myanmar section for more details. 
Data collected by Insecurity Insight shows that since the military coup on 01 February 2021 and 04 June 2026, at least 73 
publicly reported incidents of conflict -related sexual violence were recorded across 15 states and regions. Nearly 25% of 
incidents were reported in Sagaing region. Approximately 66% of incidents were attributed to the Myanmar military. Women 
and children were most frequently subjected to sexual violence and abuse in their homes, with members of the Myanmar 
military identified as the primary perpetrators.
Insecurity Insight – Monitoring incidents around the world affecting aid, health care, education, and protection. 
 
2 
Reporting Sexual Violence  
By state bodies or conflict actors that particularly targets IDPs and refugees, aid, health workers or 
educators or students among others. 
Africa 
Cameroon  
10 June 2026: In Nachtigal town, Mbam-et-Kim division, Centre region, a 15-year-old girl was raped 
by a military officer at a military facility. The officer was arrested and transferred to the Military 
Security Division's disciplinary facility. The girl received emergency medical care and psychological 
support at a military hospital. Source: MMI News  
 
Between 14 and 15 June 2026: In Yagoua town, May-Danay department, Far North province,  an 
unspecified number of women were sexually assaulted by four armed men who broke into their 
house during the night. Source: Humanity Purpose  
 
Central African Republic 
13 June 2026: In Bassin area, PK9 neighbourhood, Bangui city, a 12 -year-old boy was found 
decapitated with his genitals mutilated. The perpetrators were not identified. Source: Corbeau 
News  
 
Chad 
As reported on 13 June 2026:  Across the country, an unspecified number of refugee Sudanese 
women and underage girls were sexually exploited by local and international MSF staff members, 
who forced them to trade sex for basic necessities like food, water, and jobs. An internal MSF 
investigation, launched after a 2024 AP report, uncovered 59 allegations of abuse, including the 
abduction of seven girls in an MSF vehicle between 2024 and 2025. MSF dismissed 18 employees, 
apologised for the severe harm caused, and committed to overhauling its hiring and reference-check 
procedures to prevent future abuse. Source: Premium Times NG 
 
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
03 June 2026: In Bwisha chiefdom, Rutshutu territory, North Kivu province, a woman was subjected 
to an attempted rape by an armed man in military uniform. She and her husband were both killed 
after they resisted. Source: WIkiRumours  
 
19 June 2026:  On the Kiseya –Kilambo road, Waloa Yungu area, Walikale territory, North Kivu 
province, around 30 final-year students travelling to State Examination centres in Ntoto and Byungu 
were attacked by unidentified armed men, who intercepted them and robbed them of their notebooks, 
phones, money and other personal belongings. Three female students were reportedly subjected to 
sexual violence before the group was released. Source: Radio Okapi 
 
Ethiopia  
Between 18 and 29 June 2026: In Zayse woreda, Gamo zone, South Ethiopia Regional state, an 
unspecified number of women were sexually assaulted by South Ethiopian police and local kebele 
militia members. Source: Addis Standard  
 
Kenya  
As reported on 28 May 2026: In Gambogi locality, Hamisi sub-county, Vihiga county, a 14-year-old 
girl was raped by a police officer of the Gambogi police station. Source: Personal Communication  
 
Nigeria  
29 June 2026: In Osogbo city, Osun state, an unspecified number of female students were stripped 
naked and sexually assaulted by soldiers from the Army Depot after they forcefully entered Osun 
State University. Another student was reportedly raped, though the incident w as still being verified 
as the victim could not be identified at the time of filing the police report. Source: Punch  
 
Somalia  
16 June 2026: In Jalalaqsi town, Hiiraan province, a young girl was sexually assaulted by clan 
members. Source: Baidoa Online
Insecurity Insight – Monitoring incidents around the world affecting aid, health care, education, and protection. 
 
3 
 
17 June 2026: In Jalalaqsi town, Hiiraan province, a young girl from an opposing clan was sexually 
assaulted by three clan members in retaliation for the assault of another young girl the day before. 
This led to armed confrontations between the rival clans. Source: Baidoa Online  
Asia 
India 
13 June 2026: In Kainchi village, Nainital district, Kuamaon region, Uttarakhand state, a girl was 
sexually assaulted by two police constables, who were under the influence of alcohol. The policemen 
were caught by local residents and a criminal case registered. Source: India Today  
 
16 June 2026: In Kalyansinghpur block, Rayagada district, Odisha state, two Odisha -based NGO 
interns - a young man and a female student - were beaten up by a mob following false rumours of 
them being child kidnappers. The student was also sexually assaulted, and her clothes were forcibly 
removed. Around 20 people were arrested in connection with the assault. Source: Orissa Post and 
The Hindu 
 
17 June 2026: In Ladwa town Kurukshetra district, Haryanaa state, a 30-year-old man was physically 
assaulted, forced to strip, and sexually abused by three police personnel inside Ladwa Police Station 
following an argument that arose when he was stopped at a police chec kpoint. The man was 
admitted to hospital for a medical examination. The perpetrators were suspended, an FIR registered 
against them and a Special Investigation Team (SIT) was formed to investigate the incident. Source: 
Times of India  
 
Indonesia  
19 June 2026: Near Kali Biru area, Dekai district, Yahukimo regency, Highland Papua province,  a 
Papuan woman was sexually assaulted by armed Indonesian security forces in her garden. Source: 
Free West Papua Vanuatu Support  
 
Myanmar  
10-30 May 2026: In Myit Chay area, Pakokku township, Magway region, an unspecified number of 
women were raped and killed by members of the Myanmar military during a 20-day raid on villages 
in the area. Source: Irrawaddy  
 
10 June 2026: In Myay Sin village, Salin township, Minbu district, Magway region, two women were 
raped by armed members of the military council during a raid on the village. Source: Khit Thit News  
 
10 June 2026: In Myay Pin village, Nat Talin township, Bago region, a 28-year-old woman who had 
been forced to work as a cook for the Myanmar military since April 2026, following a raid on her 
village, was found dead and raped. Local sources stated that she had been rap ed and killed by 
military personnel. Source: Khit Thit News I 
 
16 June 2026: In Baila ward, Falam township, Chin state, a woman was subjected to an attempted 
rape at gunpoint by a member of the Military Council after she was forcibly taken from her home to 
a cemetery. The assault was prevented by her husband, who intervened. Source: Shwe Phee Myay 
News Agency  
 
21 June 2026: In Myay Sawk village, Chauk township and district, Magway region, a woman was 
raped by military council members. Source: Khit Thit News  
 
Pakistan 
As reported on 22 June 2026: In Sehrish Nagar railway crossing, Qasimbabad town, Hyderabad  
division, Sindh province, a boy was raped by two policemen at a police check point.  Source: 
ACLED1 
 
Uzbekistan 
03 June 2026: In Andijan city and region, a girl was raped by a social worker from the Center for 
Social and Legal Assistance to Minors after he took her to a multi -story building. The prosecutor’s
Insecurity Insight – Monitoring incidents around the world affecting aid, health care, education, and protection. 
 
4 
office initiated a criminal investigation, and preliminary investigative actions were underway. Source: 
Zamon UZ  
The Americas 
Colombia  
Around 22 June 2026: In Riohacha municipality, a woman from Santa Lucia indigenous community 
was raped by an unidentified number of armed men after being held captive with another 22 people. 
Authorities rescued the 22 people and one man was arrested. Source: ACLED1 
 
Mexico  
20 June 2026: In Canal de Aguas Negras, Michoacan street, Colonia Mexico neighbourhood, 
Jacona de Plancarte municipality, Michoacan state, a man was found dead and naked with a bag 
over his head.  Source: Informa Oriente  
 
 
This Monthly News Brief comprises publicly reported cases of sexual violence by law enforcement bodies, 
conflict-related sexual violence, and sexual violence that targets IDPs / refugees or vulnerable beneficiaries. It is 
published by Insecurity Insight a nd prepared from information available in local, national and international news outlets 
and online databases. This Monthly News Brief bears testimony to the brave survivors who speak about sexual violence. 
Most events of sexual violence are never reported . This compilation is neither complete nor representative. It brings 
together dispersed accounts about survivors from around the world who broke the silence. Visit our website for more 
information.  
Please get in touch if you are interested in curated datasets, if you have made a public statement that you would like us 
to include in our News Brief, to report an incident or if you have additional information on an incident we have reported on. 
Visit our website, join our mailing list.  
Insecurity Insight. 2026. Reporting Sexual Violence Monthly News Brief, June 2026. Switzerland: Insecurity 
Insight. https://bit.ly/Jun2026SV 
1 Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project (ACLED) database attribution policy. Accessed 07 July 2026.