After small military 
gains
 last year, Russia is now not only spinning its wheels in Ukraine but is actually worse off than before, pummeled by a combination of battlefield losses and economic hardship.


As it struggles on the battlefield, some experts warn that Russia may seek to regain the initiative by leaning into some of its most provocative tactics, such as sabotage in Europe and drone incursions into NATO territory.
 




After small military 
gains
 last year, Russia is now not only spinning its wheels in Ukraine but is actually worse off than before, pummeled by a combination of battlefield losses and economic hardship.


As it struggles on the battlefield, some experts warn that Russia may seek to regain the initiative by leaning into some of its most provocative tactics, such as sabotage in Europe and drone incursions into NATO territory.


On the front line, Ukraine is killing more Russians than Moscow can recruit. In May, Ukraine’s defense ministry 
counted
 35,200 dead or seriously wounded Russians for the month of April based on battlefield video. That’s about as many as Russia 
recruits
 in a given month under a costly recruitment program that cannot be easily expanded without tough political choices. In recent months, Ukraine has also begun 
choking
 off Russian logistics through the use of new, intermediate-range explosive drones that prowl deep behind Russian lines.


Russia’s economy and society are also showing signs of stress. Weighed down by military spending, Ukrainian strikes on energy, and the diversion of the labor force into the military or defense industry, Russia’s economy is 
stagnating
, raising the possibility of further 
centralization
 of the economy. An attempt to more tightly 
control
 the internet, meanwhile, has left many Russians angrier than they have been in years.


Russia has gained some 
economic
 relief thanks to higher energy sales on the back of the Iran war. But the war has also 
distracted
 the United States from its role as mediator between Ukraine and Russia, with Russia now left frustrated about the lack of 
progress
.


This stagnation, in turn, is pushing the Russians to think about ways they can shift the balance in their favor, said Andrew Peek, a former senior director for European and Russian affairs at the Trump administration’s National Security Council: “They’re looking for ways they can regain escalatory initiative, if not the war initiative.”




Some signs suggest
 Russia may already be trying to seek new ways to intimidate. On June 2, Russia 
unleashed
 a massive attack on Kyiv, apparently seeking to increase fear by prominently telegraphing the attack and then hitting the Podilskyi district of the city, a historic neighborhood that is not typically targeted.


It’s unclear to what extent this may be part of a new trend of strikes. In an open letter to Russian President Vladimir Putin, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky 
suggested
 Russia might be planning to lean more on ballistic missiles, writing, “We also know that you hope ballistic missiles will achieve for you what everything else has failed to achieve.” Ballistic missiles are one of the few weapons Moscow possesses that Ukraine cannot easily shoot down, thanks to a lack of 
interceptors
.


In a separate move, on May 29, a Russian attack drone 
slammed
 into a Romanian building near that country’s border with Ukraine, injuring two people and partially destroying an apartment. The drone was part of a wider attack of 43 Russian drones, which are frequently used to strike grain-exporting 
ports
 along the Ukrainian-Romanian border.


It is uncertain so far whether the strike was intentional, although Russia has 
previously
 flown unarmed drones through Poland. “I think it’s probable that they think that they’re indicating to Europe that this could get worse,” said Max Bergmann, the director of the Europe, Russia, and Eurasia Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.


Side by side with military escalation, Russia has also seemingly attempted a renewed charm offensive against the United States and Europe. Earlier this month, right-wing commentator Candace Owens as well as the man 
overseeing
 U.S. President Donald Trump’s ballroom, Rodney Mims Cook Jr., went to the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum, a marquee economic forum 
organized
 by the Russian government’s most senior members.


Owens has since posted multiple glowing 
accounts
 of Russia, getting an 
approving
 reaction from former U.S. Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene: “We should be friends, allies, and trading partners with Russia,” Greene wrote.


While in St. Petersburg, Cook spoke at a roundtable and 
conveyed
 a “good hello” from Trump to Putin. A White House spokesperson referred 
Foreign Policy
 to the State Department when asked if Cook was attending the conference as Trump’s representative, as 
described
 by forum organizers. U.S. Secretary of State Marco Rubio 
told
 Congress that he was “not aware” of an official U.S. delegation.


British activist 
Tommy Robinson
 and social media influencers 
Andrew and Tristan
 Tate also separately visited Russia in June. They gave similar rationales for visiting the country, with Robinson 
telling
 the 
Guardian
 that “I’ve come to see how this country got itself so well on to the straight and narrow,” and a Tate representative 
telling
 NBC News that they came to “see how the country works, understand how people live.”




Still, some experts doubt
 that Russia has much room to escalate at this point—and if it did, how much impact it would even have. “I’m not sure what that next step is out there,” said Steven Pifer, an expert at the Brookings Institution, a Washington think tank.


Within Ukraine, Russia is already hitting the country hard, Peek said. “They don’t really have much more vertical escalation left to go.” While Russia could increase ballistic missile strikes, its production capacity is limited, with no more than 50 to 70 strikes 
possible
 per month.


In Europe, Russia could lean more into the intimidation tactics that it is already using, like drone incursions or 
sabotage
. Russia could also step up attempts to influence Europe 
politically
, with a presidential election coming up in France next year.


However, Russia’s chances of success may be slim, with three recent separate elections, in Armenia, Hungary, and Moldova, ending in defeat for Kremlin-backed candidates. Meanwhile, Europe, spurred by U.S. political shifts, has doubled down on support for Ukraine with the recent 
implementation
 of a more than $100 billion loan.


Russian outreach to conservatives may also increase, Bergmann said. “What’s very clear is [the Russians] are trying to gain an audience with the [U.S.] president.”


Again, though, Russia faces a potentially difficult path. “There may be a charm offensive, but I’m not sure it’s at a particularly receptive audience,” Pifer said, noting the decrease in high-profile world leaders attending this year’s St. Petersburg forum relative to past years.


Owens’s visit generated intense criticism from other prominent right-wing media figures, such as 
Laura Loomer
 and 
Mark Levin
, with Loomer separately 
posting
 about Russian influence operations and sending an 
employee to Kyiv
 to report on Ukraine.


In his public letter to Putin, Zelensky projected confidence. “The world has not grown tired of Ukraine, as you long hoped it would. But there is growing fatigue with Russia,” he wrote.