2025
ETHIOPIA HUMANITARIAN FUND
ANNUAL REPORT
PAGE
2
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
Credits 
This document was produced by the United 
Nations Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Ethiopia. 
OCHA Ethiopia wishes to acknowledge 
the contributions of its committed staff at 
headquarters and in the field in preparing this 
document.
The latest version of this document is available 
on the EHF website at
https:/ /www.unocha.org/ethiopia-humanitarian-
fund 
Full project details, financial updates, real-time 
allocation data and indicator achievements 
against targets are available at CBPF DataHub . 
About EHF
Front Cover 
A farmer stands in his wheat field, supported 
by ZOA and ASDEPO NGOs with EHF funding.
22 November 2025,                                  
Woldiya town, North Wello Zone,                                                          
Amhara Region. 
Photo: UNOCHA/Petro Riabukhin
The designations employed and the 
presentation of material on this publication 
do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of 
the United Nations concerning the legal status 
of any country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its 
frontiers or boundaries.
Financial data is provisional and may vary upon 
financial certification.
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
PAGE
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
4         LETTER FROM THE HUMANITARIAN COORDINATOR
6         2025 IN NUMBERS
7         DONOR CONTRIBUTIONS
9         HUMANITARIAN CONTEXT AND ALLOCATIONS
15       PROMOTING LOCALIZATION
19       EHF IN ACTION
20       PROGRAMMING HIGHLIGHTS
26       EHF IN ACTION
27       RISK MANAGEMENT
30       EHF IN ACTION
31       ANNEXES
32       2025 EHF ADVISORY BOARD
33       COMMON PERFORMANCE FRAMEWORK
PAGE
4
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
LETTER FROM THE HUMANITARIAN COORDINATOR
In 2025, Ethiopia continued to face a complex 
humanitarian situation shaped by the combined 
effects of conflict, climate shocks, displacement 
and disease outbreaks. Millions of people 
remained in need of critical assistance, particularly 
in areas affected by insecurity, recurrent drought 
and limited access to essential services. 
In this context, the Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund 
(EHF) continued to play a central role in supporting 
life-saving humanitarian assistance across the 
country. Through allocating US$44.2 million, the 
Fund enabled humanitarian partners to reach 
approximately 3.2 million people, including 1.8 
million women and girls and nearly 200,000 people 
living with disabilities. This impact was made 
possible through the continued support of 12 
donors, whose valuable contributions remain vital 
to sustaining assistance for the most vulnerable. 
Humanitarian operations in Ethiopia in 2025 
unfolded against a backdrop of increasing global 
funding constraints. At a time when humanitarian 
needs remain high and increasingly complex, and 
available resources continue to decline, the EHF 
once again demonstrated its value as a flexible 
and responsive funding mechanism, capable 
of directing resources where they are needed 
most. With a strong network of pre-assessed 
partners, the Fund enabled rapid allocation 
and implementation, while maintaining robust 
standards for risk management, compliance and 
accountability. 
All EHF allocations in 2025 were aligned with 
priorities set by the Humanitarian Country Team 
and Advisory Board and informed by regular 
Priority Humanitarian Response and Critical 
Funding Gaps analyses led by the Inter-Cluster 
Coordination Group in close coordination with 
field-level structures. This collective approach 
ensured that limited resources were directed to 
the most urgent, life-saving needs, based on inter-
sectoral shared analysis and evidence. 
Throughout the year, EHF supported 67 
projects implemented by 47 non-governmental 
organizations, delivering assistance to vulnerable 
communities across multiple regions. The Fund 
enabled an integrated response to address food 
insecurity-, malnutrition-, health-, water-, sanitation- 
and hygiene-, education-, and protection-related 
needs, including gender-based violence, as well 
as the needs of internally displaced people. 
Importantly, the EHF funding reached people in 
hard-to-reach and conflict-affected areas, where 
humanitarian access remains constrained, and 
assistance would otherwise be limited. 
The Fund also remained a key instrument for 
advancing localization in Ethiopia. In 2025, more 
than 80 per cent of funding was allocated to 
Ethiopian non-governmental organizations. Nearly 
34 per cent of the funding was channelled to 
women-led organizations. These efforts contribute 
to strengthening local leadership and ensuring 
that humanitarian response is more inclusive, 
accountable and grounded in the realities of 
affected communities. 
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to 
all donors to the Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund for 
their continued support and trust. I also thank the 
members of the Advisory Board – United Nations 
agencies, non-governmental organizations and 
donor representatives – for their guidance and 
engagement. My appreciation also goes to cluster 
coordinators, strategic review committees and the 
OCHA team for their dedicated stewardship of this 
critical funding mechanism. 
At a time of persistent needs and constrained 
resources, continued solidarity and collective 
action are more essential than ever. Together, 
we must sustain our efforts to ensure that life-
saving assistance reaches those who need it most, 
wherever they are.
Sincerely, 
Ozonnia  Ojielo
Humanitarian Coordinator for Ethiopia
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
PAGE
5
Bakelo camp residents are helping to offload food assistance. Bakelo camp hosts several 
thousand displaced people.
At a time when 
humanitarian 
needs remain high 
and increasingly 
complex, and 
available resources 
continue to decline, 
the EHF once again 
demonstrated its 
value as a flexible 
and responsive 
funding mechanism, 
capable of directing 
resources where 
they are needed 
most
Ozonnia  Ojielo
Humanitarian Coordinator for 
Ethiopia
May 2025, Debre Berhan town, Amhara Region.
Photo:  UNOCHA/Charlotte Cans
PAGE
6
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
2025 IN NUMBERS
The Annual Report uses the number of people targeted as a proxy for the number of people reached and henceforth the 
term people assisted will be used. This approach allows for more timely global reporting as the final data on people 
reached only becomes available over a year after the allocation of CBPF funds. The reported outcomes will be available 
on the https:/ /cbpf.data.unocha.org/ the CBPFs will continuously monitor if targets are reached.
Figures for people assisted may include double counting as individuals often receive aid from multiple cluster/sectors. 
The maximum methodology was applied by the Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund to estimate the number of people assisted in 
2025. The total number of people assisted is thus the sum of the maximum number of targeted beneficiaries by gender 
and age by project and location at admin level three/district.
AMHARA
AFAR
TIGRAY
CONTESTED AREAS
SOMALI
OROMIA
GAMBELA
BENISHANGUL
GUMUZ
724k people
12.2M
284k people
3.8M
28k people
1.1M
48k people
1.2M
31k people
0.9M
1.1M people
12.6M
        203k people
2.2M
764k people
10.2M
Other
Refugees
Returnees
Internally displaced people
Host communities
CCCM
MPC
Food
Education
ESNFI
Nutrition
Health
WASH
Protection
4.4
4.6
4.2
4
2 1
0.9
1.7
3.7
6.2
6.6
5.32.1
1.9
2
5.0 5.1
6.7
1.6M
1.1M
293k
89.9k
37.5k
8.3 0.5
1.1
1.1
0.6
0.1
0.08
0.02
0.3
0.2
6.0
Allocations
Reserve allocations
People Assisted
Standard allocations
10.1
7.4
6.3
6.2
4.6
4
3
1.7
0.9
Total
1.3
1.3
1.6
1.8
2.6
3.1
2.8
The boundaries, names and designations used do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. 
References to ‘contested areas’ are understood within the context of the Pretoria Agreement [Article 10, 2022].
Allocations in US$
 Contributions in US$
 Allocations in US$
PEOPLE ASSISTED BY TYPE
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
PAGE
7
10.3
4.7
4.6
3.6
3.6
10.3
4.7
4.6
3.6
3.6
2.5
0.5M
20k
0.7M
Philippines
Switzerland
Luxembourg
New Zealand
Norway
Sweden
Ireland
Canada
Finland
Denmark
Netherlands 10.7M
4.7M
4.6M
3.6M
3.6M
2.5M
1.3M
0.9M
6.0
10.7
6.0
5.3
5.1
3.9
3.7
3.3
5kUnited Nations
Foundation
Donor
contributions
In 2025, the Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund (EHF) 
received US$32.8 million from 12 donors, a 
decrease of $29 million, or approximately 47 per 
cent, compared with $61.8 million from 16 donors 
in 2024. This sharp decline reflects the wider 
contraction in humanitarian financing globally 
and the increasingly constrained environment in 
which country and regional funds operate. Despite 
reduced funding, donor support enabled the EHF 
to continue directing resources to adress the most 
urgent humanitarian needs in Ethiopia, in line with 
the Humanitarian Coordinator’s priorities.  
However, a significant funding reduction in 2025, 
coupled with an already 18 per cent decline in 2024 
funding compared to 2023, led to less flexibility in 
allocation decisions, forcing tighter prioritization 
and limiting the Fund’s ability to respond at scale. It 
also constrained opportunities to expand support 
to national partners and advance localization, 
highlighting the direct impact of declining 
contributions on both operational reach and 
strategic objectives.
The top five donors to the EHF in 2025 were 
the Netherlands ($10.3 million), Denmark ($4.7 
million), Finland ($4.6 million), Canada ($3.6 
million) and Ireland ($3.6 million). Additional 
contributions were received from Sweden ($2.5 
million), Norway ($1.3 million), New Zealand 
$900,000), Luxembourg ($700,000), Switzerland 
($500,000), the Philippines ($20,000) and UN 
and other agencies ($5,000). The contribution 
from the Philippines signals continued scope 
for broadening the EHF donor base beyond its 
traditional supporters. 
The EHF will continue to intensify donor 
outreach in 2026, with a focus on strengthening 
strategic engagement, improving the visibility 
of results and demonstrating the Fund’s added 
value as a flexible, locally anchored and high-
impact financing mechanism. Priorities will 
include stronger evidence-based communication 
on results and impact, continued facilitation of 
DONOR CONTRIBUTIONS
donor field missions, and closer engagement 
on complementarity with CERF and other 
funding streams. Maintaining and expanding 
a diverse donor base will also be important as 
the Fund navigates continued uncertainty in the 
humanitarian financing landscape. 
Since its establishment in 2006, the EHF has 
been one of the largest country-based pooled 
funds globally, ranking ninth in 2025. By the end 
of 2025, and since its inception, it had received 
$1 billion, with Germany, the Netherlands and 
Contributions in US$
*Recommended by the Advisory Board and endorsed by 
the Humanitarian Coordinator
PAGE
8
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
Donor
contributions
the United Kingdom consistently among its 
largest contributors, in line with global trends, 
where these donors collectively account for a 
substantial proportion of pooled funding. The 
Ms. Sinikka Antila, Ambassador of Finland to Ethiopia, Djibouti 
and South Sudan and Permanent Representative to African 
Union, IGAD and UNECA
Quarter 4Quarter 3Quarter 2Quarter 1
3.4M
20.9M
8.2M
0.3M
CONTRIBUTIONS BY QUARTER
DONORS WITH MUL TI-YEAR CONTRIBUTIONS
$3.6M
$3.4M
$0.5Switzerland (2023 - 2026)
Ireland (2023 - 2025)
Canada (2025 - 2026)
donor base had grown from 8 donors in 2017 
to 12 in 2025, with a total number of countries 
having contributed to the Fund in different years 
reaching 27; and 2025 confirmed the need for a 
broader, more diversified donor base to preserve 
the Fund’s scale and flexibility in the years ahead.
Women getting clean water 
from a solar-powered 
borehole system. The 
system was installed 
by GOAL NGO with EHF 
funding and includes two 
water points, a reservoir, a 
cattle trough, and a clothes-
washing spot for 17,000 
people.
 March 2025,                
Borena Zone,               
Oromia Region.  
 Photo: UNOCHA/Manuel Morini 
Flexible funding through the Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund allows 
partners to respond rapidly to the most urgent needs while 
ensuring strong coordination and accountability
Contributions in US$
Contributions in US$
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
PAGE
9
Humanitarian context  
Throughout 2025, the humanitarian situation in 
Ethiopia remained complex, shaped by the combined 
effects of climate variability, localized insecurity, 
disease outbreaks, displacement, and broader 
economic pressures. These interrelated factors 
affected vulnerable populations, stretched coping 
capacities, and impacted access to essential services 
and livelihoods, particularly in areas already facing 
structural challenges. 
The situation evolved over the course of the year, 
influenced by seasonal patterns and localized 
security dynamics. Early 2025 was marked by below-
average and delayed Deyr/Hageya rains in southern 
and south-eastern lowland areas, associated with 
La Niña conditions. This contributed to drought-
like conditions in pastoral and agro-pastoral zones, 
particularly in Somali and Oromia regions, where 
communities were still recovering from previous 
climatic shocks. As a result, food insecurity and 
acute malnutrition remained areas of concern, with 
many households experiencing reduced livestock 
productivity, limited market access, and increased 
pressure on livelihoods.
Later in the year, localized flooding and landslides 
in other parts of the country further affected 
communities, damaging infrastructure, displacing 
populations, and interrupting service delivery. These 
climate-related events highlighted the need for 
context-specific humanitarian responses, including 
anticipatory and early action approaches. 
Localized insecurity in some regions, including 
parts of Amhara and Oromia, as well as areas along 
regional borders, continued to impact communities 
by contributing to displacement, disrupting access 
to basic services, and affecting the operating 
environment. The fluid nature of the situation posed 
challenges for consistent service delivery, particularly 
in remote and hard-to-reach locations. Protection 
concerns remained significant in affected areas, 
including risks related to gender-based violence, 
child protection, and exposure to explosive hazards, 
especially among displaced populations. 
Public health challenges also influenced the 
humanitarian context. Cholera outbreaks were 
reported in multiple regions, linked to displacement, 
water and sanitation conditions, and climatic 
factors. Malaria and measles cases fluctuated 
throughout the year, particularly in Oromia, Amhara, 
and southern regions, with access to prevention 
and treatment services varying across locations. 
In November 2025, Ethiopia confirmed its first 
Marburg virus disease outbreak, which the 
Government quickly contained, underscoring the 
importance of continued preparedness and a 
coordinated response to emerging health risks. 
Population movements remained dynamic, 
driven by a combination of climatic pressures 
and localized insecurity. Internal displacement 
persisted across several regions, including Amhara, 
Oromia, Tigray, and Somali. At the same time, 
return movements remained gradual, influenced 
by security conditions, access to services, and 
local dynamics. Ethiopia also continued to host a 
significant number of refugees, placing additional 
demand on services in host communities. 
Across contexts, humanitarian operations 
continued to face a range of operational challenges, 
including security considerations, administrative 
processes, and logistical constraints, which at 
times affected the timely delivery of assistance, 
particularly in remote and underserved areas. In 
this context, strengthening collaboration with 
national and local partners remains essential 
to ensure sustained and effective support for 
affected populations. 
Humanitarian Context 
and Allocations
PAGE
10
Annu AL rEPort
EHF 2025
HuMAnit Ari An contEXt
AnD ALL ocAtions
March 2025 | Standard Allocation: Areas-based 
approach to support people affected by drough t
By February, the ongoing and unprecedented drought 
had deepened poverty levels, compounded pre-existing 
vulnerabilities, and stripped communities of their 
livelihoods. This allocation of $25 million supported 
early action and an area-based approach, mitigating 
drought-induced displacements in rural areas.
Third Reserve Allocation 
The Third Reserve Allocation, launched in October 2025 
with US$16 million, aimed to support 1.16 million people in the 
context of ongoing conflict, displacement and disease outbreaks.
The allocation focused on:
• Multi-sectoral support in prioritized sites for internally 
displaced people, including collective centres in Amhara, 
Oromia and Tigray, and informal settlements in Somali and 
Oromia, with particular emphasis on border conflict-affected 
zones ($10.5 million)
• Time-bound humanitarian assistance in areas of voluntary 
return of internally displaced people to Eastern Tigray and 
Western Oromia ($4.5 million)
• Assistance to unregistered refugees from South Sudan living 
near host communities in Gambela, providing a six-month 
humanitarian package to support their transition into formal 
refugee camps under UNHCR’s mandate ($1.5 million). 
    Affected people across multiple regions received integrated 
assistance, particularly in displacement settings and underserved 
areas where needs had intensified, and access to services 
remained constrained. Support included improved access to 
basic services in collective sites and informal settlements, 
assistance for returning internally displaced people to meet 
immediate needs during transition, and sustained support for 
vulnerable refugees through coordinated multi-sectoral 
packages.
   The EHF continued to strengthen the localization agenda.           
By enabling 22 partners to rapidly scale up assistance, including 
national organizations operating in hard-to-reach areas, the 
allocation helped maintain the continuity of life-saving services 
and respond to emerging needs in a highly dynamic operational 
environment.
First Reserve Allocation 
Launched in April 2025, the First Rese rve Allocation 
provided US$5.2 million to address urgent humanitarian needs 
driven by cholera outbreaks, malnutrition and protection risks, at 
a critical time when funding disruptions threatened the continuity 
of essential services.
       The Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund (EHF) fast-tracked the 
following humanitarian interventions through this allocation :
• Cholera response ($1.7 million to support around 250,000 
people)
• Emergency health and nutrition services ($1.5 million to 
assist nearly 150,000 people)
• Gender-based violence-related services ($2 million to 
support 50,000 vulnerable people).
   The allocation aimed to provide integrated assistance to 
420,000 people with overlapping needs across Amhara, Oromia, 
Tigray, Afar and Gambela, including improved access to 
sanitation facilities and safe drinking water for 120,000 people, 
improved health services through primary health-care 
consultations and family planning for 60,000 people, 
supplements for 40,000 children through outpatient therapeutic 
programmes and other nutrition support, basic supplies to 
address cholera, emergency mental health and psychological 
support, services for gender-based violence survivors and 
prevention activities, emergency cash and other assistance.
     The allocation also reinforced the role of national partners in 
humanitarian action. Ethiopian NGOs (9 out of 12 partners) 
received 73 per cent of funding ($3.8 million), enabling them to 
assist people in hard-to-access areas where operational 
presence and community trust were critical.
Second Reserve Allocation 
Launched in April 2025, when the EHF provided US$6 
million to address critical, life-threatening humanitarian 
needs in the Tigray Region, amid deteriorating conditions 
linked to sustained displacement, funding shortfalls, 
collapsing service pipelines and heightened vulnerability 
ahead of the rainy season.
The funding was allocated to provide: 
• Multi-sectoral assistance for internally displaced people in 
collective sites ($2.5 million to support nearly 345,000 
people)
• Integrated response to protection risks, including 
gender-based violence ($1.5 million to assist 95,000 
people)
• Nutrition response in hotspot areas ($2 million to support 
200,000 people). 
   These interventions enabled 640,000 vulnerable people 
across north-western, central and eastern zones of Tigray to 
receive integrated assistance, particularly in collective sites 
and underserved areas where access to services remained 
limited. Support included improvements in living conditions 
through shelter and site management, access to safe water 
and sanitation, treatment and prevention of malnutrition, 
primary health-care services, and protection interventions to 
reduce risks and improve safety and dignity for displaced 
people.
     Under this allocation, Ethiopian NGOs received 75 per cent 
of the funding ($4.5 million), enabling them to ensure the 
continuity of essential services during a period of heightened 
vulnerability.  
 First Standard Allocation 
 The First Standard Allocation, launched in May 2025, 
provided US$17 million to address high-severity and 
protracted humanitarian needs across Amhara, Oromia, 
Somali, Tigray and Gambela, where conflict, displacement, 
food insecurity and protection risks continued to affect large 
segments of the population.
The allocation prioritized three areas:
• Integrated response to malnutrition ($8 million)
• Response to critical gaps in gender-based violence services 
($5 million)
• Access to emergency education for crisis-affected 
communities ($4 million)
   Projects under this allocation aimed to support nearly 
950,000 vulnerable people, including malnourished children, 
pregnant and lactating women, gender-based violence 
survivors and out-of-school children. Assistance included 
therapeutic feeding and nutrition support, access to health 
and related services, psychosocial and protection support, 
and the provision of learning materials and safe learning 
environments, helping stabilize conditions for families facing 
prolonged crisis.
      Representing approximately 38 per cent of EHF funding in 
2025, this was the Fund’s largest allocation and a lifeline in 
areas with persistent humanitarian needs. Twenty-three 
partners (out of them 18 national organizations) implemented 
projects, including to assist 94,000 people with sanitary and 
hygiene kits, 80,000 people with animal health interventions, 
more than 60,000 children and pregnant women with 
vitamins and micronutrients, at least 55,000 people with 
clean water, over 40,000 children with access to learning and 
recreational materials, 16,000 survivors of gender-based 
violence and vulnerable women with case management and 
more. Some $750,000 in cash-based interventions was 
allocated for disbursement to 13,000 people across regions.
2025 ALLOCATIONS
Annu AL rEPort
EHF 2025
PAGE
11
HuMAnit Ari An contEXt 
AnD  ALL ocAtions
March 2025 | Standard Allocation: Areas-based 
approach to support people affected by drough t
By February, the ongoing and unprecedented drought 
had deepened poverty levels, compounded pre-existing 
vulnerabilities, and stripped communities of their 
livelihoods. This allocation of $25 million supported 
early action and an area-based approach, mitigating 
drought-induced displacements in rural areas.
Third Reserve Allocation 
The Third Reserve Allocation, launched in October 2025 
with US$16 million, aimed to support 1.16 million people in the 
context of ongoing conflict, displacement and disease outbreaks.
The allocation focused on:
• Multi-sectoral support in prioritized sites for internally 
displaced people, including collective centres in Amhara, 
Oromia and Tigray, and informal settlements in Somali and 
Oromia, with particular emphasis on border conflict-affected 
zones ($10.5 million)
• Time-bound humanitarian assistance in areas of voluntary 
return of internally displaced people to Eastern Tigray and 
Western Oromia ($4.5 million)
• Assistance to unregistered refugees from South Sudan living 
near host communities in Gambela, providing a six-month 
humanitarian package to support their transition into formal 
refugee camps under UNHCR’s mandate ($1.5 million). 
    Affected people across multiple regions received integrated 
assistance, particularly in displacement settings and underserved 
areas where needs had intensified, and access to services 
remained constrained. Support included improved access to 
basic services in collective sites and informal settlements, 
assistance for returning internally displaced people to meet 
immediate needs during transition, and sustained support for 
vulnerable refugees through coordinated multi-sectoral 
packages.
   The EHF continued to strengthen the localization agenda.           
By enabling 22 partners to rapidly scale up assistance, including 
national organizations operating in hard-to-reach areas, the 
allocation helped maintain the continuity of life-saving services 
and respond to emerging needs in a highly dynamic operational 
environment.
First Reserve Allocation 
Launched in April 2025, the First Rese rve Allocation 
provided US$5.2 million to address urgent humanitarian needs 
driven by cholera outbreaks, malnutrition and protection risks, at 
a critical time when funding disruptions threatened the continuity 
of essential services.
       The Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund (EHF) fast-tracked the 
following humanitarian interventions through this allocation :
• Cholera response ($1.7 million to support around 250,000 
people)
• Emergency health and nutrition services ($1.5 million to 
assist nearly 150,000 people)
• Gender-based violence-related services ($2 million to 
support 50,000 vulnerable people).
   The allocation aimed to provide integrated assistance to 
420,000 people with overlapping needs across Amhara, Oromia, 
Tigray, Afar and Gambela, including improved access to 
sanitation facilities and safe drinking water for 120,000 people, 
improved health services through primary health-care 
consultations and family planning for 60,000 people, 
supplements for 40,000 children through outpatient therapeutic 
programmes and other nutrition support, basic supplies to 
address cholera, emergency mental health and psychological 
support, services for gender-based violence survivors and 
prevention activities, emergency cash and other assistance.
     The allocation also reinforced the role of national partners in 
humanitarian action. Ethiopian NGOs (9 out of 12 partners) 
received 73 per cent of funding ($3.8 million), enabling them to 
assist people in hard-to-access areas where operational 
presence and community trust were critical.
Second Reserve Allocation 
Launched in April 2025, when the EHF provided US$6 
million to address critical, life-threatening humanitarian 
needs in the Tigray Region, amid deteriorating conditions 
linked to sustained displacement, funding shortfalls, 
collapsing service pipelines and heightened vulnerability 
ahead of the rainy season.
The funding was allocated to provide: 
• Multi-sectoral assistance for internally displaced people in 
collective sites ($2.5 million to support nearly 345,000 
people)
• Integrated response to protection risks, including 
gender-based violence ($1.5 million to assist 95,000 
people)
• Nutrition response in hotspot areas ($2 million to support 
200,000 people). 
   These interventions enabled 640,000 vulnerable people 
across north-western, central and eastern zones of Tigray to 
receive integrated assistance, particularly in collective sites 
and underserved areas where access to services remained 
limited. Support included improvements in living conditions 
through shelter and site management, access to safe water 
and sanitation, treatment and prevention of malnutrition, 
primary health-care services, and protection interventions to 
reduce risks and improve safety and dignity for displaced 
people.
     Under this allocation, Ethiopian NGOs received 75 per cent 
of the funding ($4.5 million), enabling them to ensure the 
continuity of essential services during a period of heightened 
vulnerability.  
 First Standard Allocation 
 The First Standard Allocation, launched in May 2025, 
provided US$17 million to address high-severity and 
protracted humanitarian needs across Amhara, Oromia, 
Somali, Tigray and Gambela, where conflict, displacement, 
food insecurity and protection risks continued to affect large 
segments of the population.
The allocation prioritized three areas:
• Integrated response to malnutrition ($8 million)
• Response to critical gaps in gender-based violence services 
($5 million)
• Access to emergency education for crisis-affected 
communities ($4 million)
   Projects under this allocation aimed to support nearly 
950,000 vulnerable people, including malnourished children, 
pregnant and lactating women, gender-based violence 
survivors and out-of-school children. Assistance included 
therapeutic feeding and nutrition support, access to health 
and related services, psychosocial and protection support, 
and the provision of learning materials and safe learning 
environments, helping stabilize conditions for families facing 
prolonged crisis.
      Representing approximately 38 per cent of EHF funding in 
2025, this was the Fund’s largest allocation and a lifeline in 
areas with persistent humanitarian needs. Twenty-three 
partners (out of them 18 national organizations) implemented 
projects, including to assist 94,000 people with sanitary and 
hygiene kits, 80,000 people with animal health interventions, 
more than 60,000 children and pregnant women with 
vitamins and micronutrients, at least 55,000 people with 
clean water, over 40,000 children with access to learning and 
recreational materials, 16,000 survivors of gender-based 
violence and vulnerable women with case management and 
more. Some $750,000 in cash-based interventions was 
allocated for disbursement to 13,000 people across regions.
17M
14.8M
8.2M
16M
6M
3M
The humanitarian situation in Ethiopia 
remains critical, driven by  a confluence of 
factors, including ongoing conflicts, 
particularly in Amhara and western 
Oromia, and back-to-back climate shocks.
First Priority Humanitarian Response 
and Critical Funding Gaps document 
published.
Cholera outbreak significantly 
affects Gambela and Amhara 
regions with at least 12 woredas 
affected.
Deteriorating conditions  in regions 
linked to displacement, funding 
shortfalls, collapsing service pipelines 
and heightened vulnerability ahead of 
the rainy season.
First Reserve Allocation: to address urgent  
humanitarian needs
Contributions Allocations
2025
Second Reserve Allocation: to address 
critical life-threatening humanitarian needs 
in Tigray
First Standard Allocation: to address urgent  
life-threatening humanitarian needs across 
Ethiopia
CERF Rapid Response allocation for South 
Sudanese new arrivals and host 
communities in Gambela
Third Reserve Allocation: to address critical 
needs of internally displaced people, 
returnees, and refugees across Ethiopia
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
20k
0.9M
2.5M
1.3M
0.3M
14.9M
8.2M
4.7M 5.2M
17M
16M
3M
6M
Large-scale displacement escalated in 
Somali and Oromia border zones , 
straining already overstretched 
humanitarian services. At the same time, 
conditions for voluntary returns have 
opened in limited areas of Eastern 
Tigray, and western Oromia.
Second Humanitarian Response Priorities 
and Critical Funding Requirements and 
Gaps document published.
PAGE
12
Annu AL rEPort
EHF 2025
HuMAnit Ari An contEXt
AnD ALL ocAtions
A man receives household 
water treatment chemicals 
distributed by Fayyaa 
Integrated Development 
Organization with the 
financial support of EHF 
to support safe water 
access for conflict-affected 
families. 
December 2025,              
Diga Woreda, East Wellaga 
Zone, Oromia Region. 
Photo: FIDO/Galena Tasfa
Implications for humanitarian response and the 
Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund (EHF) allocations 
In the context of declining humanitarian funding, 
prioritization focused on life-saving interventions, 
high-severity areas and locations with limited 
humanitarian presence. This prioritization 
approach meant that assistance could only 
reach a portion of people in need, reinforcing 
the importance of targeted allocations and 
complementary funding streams. In 2025, the EHF 
aimed to support 3.2 million people across Ethiopia. 
The EHF allocations were designed to address 
existing humanitarian needs, including acute 
malnutrition, disease outbreaks and protection 
risks; support multi-sectoral response to 
displacement; enable rapid response to emerging 
shocks; ensure complementarity with CERF and 
other funding streams; and prioritize local and 
national responders.  
The sequencing of allocations aligned with the 
evolution of needs: earlier reserve allocations 
addressed outbreak impacts, followed by a 
standard allocation targeting high-severity and 
underserved areas, and a late-year reserve 
allocation responding to conflict, displacement 
and disease outbreaks.
Overview of the EHF allocations in 2025 
In 2025, the EHF launched four allocations 
totalling US$44.2 million, comprising three 
reserve allocations and one standard allocation. 
These allocations were sequenced to respond 
to emerging shocks and critical humanitarian 
needs. The allocations targeted approximately 
3.2 million people, of whom around 1.62 million 
people (51 per cent) had been reached by the end 
of the year, while many projects were still ongoing 
moving into 2026. 
The Fund prioritized multi-sectoral response 
integrating health, WASH, nutrition, emergency 
livelihoods, protection and emergency shelter 
interventions; displacement-affected people; 
conflict-affected and hard-to-reach areas; 
gender-transformative programming, prevention 
and response to gender-based violence; and 
localization, with emphasis on national and 
women-led organizations. 
The EHF promoted area-based and community-
informed approaches, which prioritized 
geographically targeted response, where needs 
were most acute, and enabled partners to design 
multi-sectoral interventions based on localized
Annu AL rEPort
EHF 2025
PAGE
13
HuMAnit Ari An contEXt 
AnD  ALL ocAtions
Community members 
receive food assistance at 
Asbole-Boda evacuation 
site as part of the 
humanitarian response to 
evacuations due to a surge 
in seismic activity in nearby 
areas. 
January 2025,             
Awash Woreda,                
Afar Region. 
Photo: UNOCHA/Alex O’Mahony 
analyses of vulnerabilities and service gaps. 
Subnational coordination structures and clusters 
played a central role in identifying priorities, with 
review processes incorporating expertise and 
inputs from local actors to ensure that proposed 
interventions reflected operational realities.               
 
This helped strengthen the relevance, coherence 
and timeliness of assistance, while bringing 
decision-making closer to affected communities. 
Around 77 per cent of funding ($34 million) was 
channelled directly to implementing partners. In 
comparison, some 23 per cent ($10.2 million) 
was delivered through sub-implementing 
arrangements, supporting both efficient delivery 
and broader operational reach. 
Through this combination of reserve and 
standard allocations, the Fund supported life-
saving interventions in high-severity and hard-
to-reach areas, with a focus on displacement, 
protection risks, disease outbreaks and food 
insecurity. The EHF increasingly prioritized 
empowering affected people through integrated 
context-specific assistance, including cash-based 
support and community-informed approaches, 
to reduce dependency on humanitarian aid and 
strengthen resilience.
PAGE
14
Annu AL rEPort
EHF 2025
HuMAnit Ari An contEXt
AnD ALL ocAtions
Integrated malnutrition
Response type by woreda
GBV
Cholera
Internally displaced people
Education
Multiple types of response
Returnees
CONTESTED 
SOMALI
DIRE DAWA
HARARI
OROMIA
Addis Ababa
SOUTH
ETHIOPIA
CENTRAL
ETHIOPIA
SIDAMA
SOUTH WEST
ETHIOPIA
GAMBELA
AMHARA
BENISHANGUL
GUMUZ
TIGRAY
AFAR
$12.6M
$12.2M
$3.8M
$1.2M
$2.2M
$0.9M
$1.1M $10.2M
SUMMARY OF EHF ALLOCATIONS IN 2025
 Funding  amount 
 by region in US$
This region-by-region breakdown of the EHF allocations in 2025 reflects the concentration of humanitarian aid and highlights 
the Fund’s focus on conflict-affected, displacement-heavy and climate-vulnerable regions, as well as areas with limited 
humanitarian presence. 
$44.2M
Total allocations
$11.9M
INGOs
$32.3M
NNGOs
$33.9M
Direct implementations
$7.4M NNGOs
$2.9M INGOs
73%
27%
76.9%
16.7%
6.4%
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
PAGE
15
$44.2M
Total allocations
$11.9M
INGOs
$32.3M
NNGOs
$33.9M
Direct implementations
$7.4M NNGOs
$2.9M INGOs
73%
27%
76.9%
16.7%
6.4%
The Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund (EHF) continued 
to advance localization in 2025 by prioritizing direct 
funding to national partners and strengthening 
locally led humanitarian action. In line with its 
Localization Strategy published in July 2025, the 
Fund remained committed to increasing funding 
for national and local responders, promoting 
equitable partnerships and supporting the 
institutional capacity of national actors to lead 
humanitarian response. In 2025, the EHF further 
consolidated its position as a principal source 
of humanitarian funding for national actors in 
Ethiopia, reinforcing its role in enabling locally 
led response. 
Increased direct funding to local partners 
In 2025, approximately US$32.3 million                        
(73 per cent) of funding was channelled directly 
to national partners, with a further $3.3 million 
(7.5 per cent) reaching sub-implementing partners 
ALLOCATION FLOW BY PARTNER TYPE  
Promoting
Localization
national NGOs. National partners played a 
central role in delivering assistance, particularly 
in hard-to-reach and access-constrained areas.  
Across reserve allocations, localization 
remained a consistent feature. For example, 
in the First Reserve Allocation, national 
NGOs received 73 per cent of funding 
($3.8 million), while in the Second Reserve 
A l l o c a t i o n ,  t h e y  r e c e i v e d  7 5  p e r  c e n t                                                                        
($4.5 million), demonstrating the Fund’s ability 
to translate localization commitments into 
operational practice and confirming the Fund’s 
strong emphasis on channelling resources to 
national actors. 
Progress over time further illustrates this shift. 
Overall funding to national NGOs increased 
from 12 per cent in 2021 to 81 per cent in 2025. 
Allocations in US$
PAGE
16
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
ProMotinG
LocALiz Ation
Diversified partner base 
The number of national partners receiving direct 
funding grew from 5 in 2021 to 32 in 2025, with 
11 new NGOs obtaining funding for the first 
time. At the same time, funding to women-led 
organizations increased more than fivefold since 
2021 – from five to almost 34 per cent in 2025 – 
reflecting efforts to broaden the participation of 
diverse local actors. As of 2025, the EHF has 18 
eligible partners among women-led organization, 
10 of which were onboarded in 2025. Five out of 
these newly onboarded partners received funding 
for the first time to implement seven projects in 
hard-to-reach areas, including cholera response 
and assistance to returnees in areas bordering 
Eritrea. Many of these organizations focus on 
protection, gender-based violence and inclusive 
programming, reinforcing the role of women-led 
actors in addressing priority humanitarian needs 
in displacement-affected and high-risk areas. 
Partner diversification also improved, with the 
share of funding received by the ten largest 
partners declining from 50 per cent in 2021 to 
19 per cent in 2025, indicating a more distributed 
funding model. This trend is reflected in 2025 
allocations, where national NGOs accounted 
for over 81 per cent of total funding. In total, 
47 partners implemented 67 projects in 2025, 
reflecting an increasingly diversified and inclusive 
partner base. In 2025, the EHF prioritized 
onboarding partners working in hard-to-reach and 
underserved areas where local responders on the 
ground had better access and greater efficiency 
in reaching people in need. 
To further strengthen the voice and representation 
of national actors, the governance structure of 
the Fund was reviewed in 2025, in accordance 
with the Localization strategy, further agreed 
on by the Advisory Board and endorsed by 
the Humanitarian Coordinator, to include five 
national NGO networks in advisory and decision-
making mechanisms.
Stabilization Center (SC) 
unit established by Fayyaa 
Integrated Development 
Organization as part of a 
multisectoral emergency 
response project funded 
by the EHF .
May 2025, Fitche town,                 
North Shewa Zone, 
Oromia Region.  
Photo: FIDO/Dawit Mulugeta 
A national organization, Fayyaa Integrated Development Organization (FIDO), provided 
water-, sanitation- and hygiene-related assistance in Jido Misira, East Hararghe, an area 
where communities previously relied on unsafe water sources and that has been hard 
to reach for most humanitarians. Through the installation of a solar-powered water system (28 
panels, 15,400W capacity), the project provided access to safe water for more than 10,000 families, 
reducing reliance on distant and unsafe sources. The intervention contributed to a reported 50 per 
cent reduction in waterborne diseases, reduced the time spent on water collection, particularly 
for women and children, and strengthened local capacity through training for system operators. 
This highlights the ability of national partners to deliver effective assistance in access-constrained 
environments.
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
PAGE
17
ProMotinG
LocALiz Ation
Quality response 
Monitoring data provided evidence that increased 
localization had not come at the expense of quality. 
Among national NGO partners categorized as high 
or medium risk, 87 per cent received monitoring 
ratings of “good” or above, including in complex 
operational environments. This indicated that 
national partners were increasingly able to deliver 
humanitarian response at scale and in line with 
required standards, including in areas with limited 
access and heightened risks. This was consistent 
with overall monitoring results, which showed 
that the majority of projects across risk levels 
met the required standards for implementation 
and reporting. 
Structural barriers and equitable partnerships  
At the same time, structural constraints continued 
to affect the depth of localization. While more 
national partners were accessing funding, many 
newly onboarded organizations (more than half of 
40 onboarded since 2021) had implemented only 
one or two projects, limiting their ability to scale 
and highlighting the challenge of moving beyond 
initial engagement towards sustained partnership. 
Funding ceilings linked to partner risk categories 
remained a key constraint, even where partners 
demonstrated strong performance. In addition, 
the share of indirect funding through sub-
granting arrangements decreased to 7.5 per cent, 
underscoring the Fund’s efforts to eliminate 
pass-through arrangements and provide funding 
as directly as possible to local responders. In 
2025, the EHF continued to address risk-sharing 
challenges by expanding direct funding to national 
partners while maintaining strengthened oversight 
and compliance frameworks. The share of indirect 
funding through sub-granting arrangements 
decreased to 7.5 per cent, underscoring the 
Fund’s efforts to reduce intermediary layers and 
ensure that funding reaches frontline responders 
more directly. 
Supported by the Advisory Board and led by the 
Humanitarian Coordinator, efforts were also 
made to promote more equitable partnership 
arrangements, including fairer sharing of 
programme support costs. Out of 67 projects 
allocated in 2025, 49 projects included sub-
implementing partners, with a 7 per cent programme 
support cost share allocated proportionally to all 
sub-partners. While this represented progress 
towards more balanced partnerships, continued 
efforts were needed to ensure more equitable cost-
sharing arrangements and strengthen the financial 
sustainability of national organizations.  Duty of 
care considerations were also integrated into 
programme design and implementation, including 
through capacity-strengthening, risk mitigation 
measures and strengthened support to partners 
operating in high-risk and access-constrained 
environments. 
Capacity-strengthening and innovation 
A dedicated Partnerships Officer position was 
established to support the implementation of 
the Localization Strategy, including analyzing 
partner capacity assessments and developing 
structured capacity-strengthening plans. The 
Fund also explored mechanisms to support 
mentorship arrangements between experienced 
and newly onboarded partners, as well as the 
allocation of targeted resources within projects 
to address identified capacity gaps. OCHA 
invested in strengthening the capacity of national 
actors, training over 2,500 national humanitarian 
workers to enhance the technical and operational 
capacities of local partners and support more 
effective delivery of the humanitarian response.
 
The EHF funding also supported locally led 
and innovative approaches that combined 
humanitarian assistance with early recovery and 
resilience-building. For example, a women-led 
initiative implemented by a national organization 
A women-led organization, the New Millennium Women Empowerment Organization 
(NMWEO), implemented a protection project in Central Tigray that shifted from one-time 
dignity kit distribution to a sustainable, women-led production model for reusable sanitary 
pads, combining protection outcomes with livelihoods support. Through this approach, more than 
1,000 internally displaced women and girls accessed menstrual hygiene products, while over a 
dozen vulnerable women were trained and employed to produce reusable pads, establishing a 
locally owned cooperative model. The initiative improved access to essential items, reduced 
long-term costs and created income opportunities, demonstrating how women-led organizations 
can deliver integrated humanitarian response that strengthens dignity, economic empowerment 
and sustainability.
PAGE
18
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
ProMotinG
LocALiz Ation
The support of the Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund demonstrates the 
transformative impact of investing in local leadership. Through 
this partnership, organizations like ours are not only delivering 
life-saving assistance but also helping shape humanitarian 
response that are grounded in the realities of the communities 
we serve. What makes this partnership particularly meaningful 
is the spirit in which it is delivered, marked by transparency, 
timely support, genuine collaboration, and a deep commitment to 
reaching communities who are in need of urgent care and support
Local residents collect 
water at a communal water 
point rehabilitated by a 
national NGO Mothers and 
Children Multisectoral 
Development Organization 
with funding from the EHF 
to support more than 8,500 
people with access to safe 
water. 
July 2025,                        
May Tsebri town,  
Contested Areas. 
Photo: UNOCHA/ Manuel Morini
Reverent Anbessu Tolla  
Executive Director of Fayyaa Integrated Development Organization (FIDO)  
in Tigray shifted from the one-off distribution of 
dignity kits to the local production of reusable 
sanitary pads through a cooperative model. By 
combining protection outcomes with income 
generation and local ownership, the initiative 
demonstrated how locally led solutions can 
address immediate needs while contributing 
to longer-term resilience and sustainability.
Annu AL rEPort
EHF 2025
EHF in
Action
PAGE
19
EHF IN ACTION: RESTORING SAFETY AND  DIGNITY FOR 
WOMEN
She is standing next to her simple home, with a roof 
held together by four road rocks. She is smiling, but in 
her eyes, you can see the sadness and the scars of the 
hardships she endured.
Tajebesh, 58, a widowed mother of two, has lived 
through years of conflict, insecurity and fear. Her 
home in Adiwosene village, in Mai Tsebri district, was 
severely damaged during the 2021 hostilities. For the 
next four years, she lived alone in a structure with no 
doors and a leaking roof.
 “I was so scared. Every night, as I tried to fall 
asleep, I would tremble at what the night might 
bring. Some women around here have suffered 
from violence, the horrors they have lived through... 
And in my shelter, without a proper door, anyone 
could just walk in at any time,” she says.
For many people in Mai Tsebri, humanitarian assis-
tance has been a lifeline. Since last November, Tajebesh 
and some 2,000 other vulnerable women in the area 
have received emergency cash assistance. Tajebesh 
used the money to buy materials and repair her 
home, finally securing both her door and roof.
 “I feel safe again. Now I can finally sleep, 
knowing there is a lock on my door,” she shares 
with tears in her eyes.
She also used part of the assistance to buy fertilizers 
for her small maize plot. A modest harvest allows 
her to meet her family’s food needs, and she is able 
to sell any surplus at a local market.
 “I’m saving money to help my daughters. This 
aid has truly changed my life.”
Tajebesh, 58, a widowed 
mother of two, near 
home. She recieved cash 
assistance from ZOA with 
the financial support of EHF 
to address her needs. 
July 2025,            
Adiwosene village,          
May Tsebri town,   
Contested Areas.  
Photo: UNOCHA/Petro Riabukhin
PAGE
20
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
Programming 
Highlights
In 2025, the Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund (EHF) 
continued to support efforts to strengthen 
protection systems, promote gender equality 
and respond to gender-based violence (GBV), 
combining life-saving service delivery with 
investments in system strengthening and 
community-based prevention. 
The EHF supported 32 projects with a protection 
component (including GBV), totalling nearly 
US$10.1 million, of which nearly 75 per cent was 
dedicated to GBV prevention, risk mitigation, and 
response activities. These interventions were 
implemented across multiple regions of the 
country, including Amhara, Oromia, Tigray, Somali 
and Gambela, reflecting the concentration of 
needs in conflict-affected, displacement-affected 
and climate-vulnerable areas where protection 
systems had been significantly weakened and 
access to services remained limited. Needs 
assessments across project locations highlighted 
severe gaps in GBV response, including reported 
incidents of conflict-related sexual violence 
and the widespread lack of access to clinical, 
psychosocial and legal support. 
The EHF-funded interventions prioritized 
community-based protection approaches, 
strengthened accountability to affected people 
and reinforced prevention and response 
mechanisms related to sexual exploitation 
and abuse, while also expanding access to 
comprehensive survivor-centred services such 
as GBV case management, mental health and 
psychosocial support (MHPSS), legal assistance, 
referral services and emergency cash assistance.
MHPSS were delivered at scale, reaching 
hundreds of thousands of people with combined 
GBV and psychosocial assistance, including 
individual counselling, group support sessions 
and community-based activities, reflecting 
both the magnitude of needs and the centrality 
of trauma-informed care in the humanitarian 
response. Emergency cash assistance was 
provided to GBV survivors to support access to 
services, transportation, temporary shelter and 
other urgent needs, while also helping to reduce 
negative coping mechanisms linked to economic 
vulnerability. Across projects, thousands of 
dignity kits were distributed to women and 
girls, contributing to improved safety, hygiene 
and dignity in displacement and crisis settings. 
These distributions were complemented by the 
establishment and strengthening of women- 
and girls-friendly spaces, which provided safe, 
confidential and accessible entry points for 
survivors to access integrated services, including 
psychosocial support, case management 
and referrals.
In addition to direct service delivery, the EHF 
investments contributed to strengthening GBV 
response systems. Projects supported the 
training of local service providers, including 
health workers, social workers and legal 
actors on survivor-centred approaches, Clinical 
Management of Rape, psychological first aid and 
The EHF-supported programming in 2025 
demonstrated strong integration across sectors 
and cross-cutting priorities, including protection 
mainstreaming, gender equality, inclusion of people 
with disabilities and community engagement. 
Multi-sectoral approaches enabled partners to 
address overlapping needs more effectively.
$10.1M
70%
30%
GBV
General
Protection
Gender based violence response 
Allocations in US$
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
PAGE
21
ProGrAMMinG  
HiGHLiGH ts
case management. Referral pathways between 
health, protection and legal services were 
established or updated across multiple woredas, 
improving coordination and enabling more timely 
and effective support for survivors. Investments 
in One-Stop Centres and local service structures 
further enhanced the capacity of national systems 
to deliver integrated and quality GBV services. 
At the community level, interventions placed 
strong emphasis on prevention and risk mitigation. 
Large-scale awareness-raising activities were 
conducted through community dialogues, outreach 
campaigns and engagement with religious leaders, 
youth groups and women’s associations. 
A woman sells essentials 
in an improvised shop in 
Bakelo camp for internally 
displaced people. 
May 2025,                     
Debre Berhan town,  
Amhara Region. 
Photo: UNOCHA/Charlotte Cans 
Women Empowerment-Action (WE-Action), a national women-led NGO, strengthened 
integrated GBV response services in conflict-affected areas in Amhara by supporting 
a One-Stop Centre and establishing two women and girls’ spaces, providing survivors 
with access to comprehensive care. The project delivered protection and life-saving assistance 
to almost 2,000 people, including 530 survivors receiving case management and over 1,000 
survivors accessing emergency cash assistance, alongside psychosocial support and “dignity kits” 
supplies. By combining service delivery with institutional strengthening, the intervention improved 
access to coordinated medical, psychosocial and protection services, reinforcing survivor-centred 
approaches in areas with limited service availability and highlighting the critical role of national 
organizations in delivering specialized protection services.
Projects funded by the EHF also supported the 
establishment of community-based protection 
committees, strengthened early risk identification, 
promoted referrals, and facilitated local ownership 
of GBV prevention efforts. These interventions 
aimed to reduce stigma, increase awareness 
of available services and contribute to shifts 
in harmful social norms that perpetuate GBV. 
GBV risk mitigation was incorporated across 
sectors, including shelter, WASH and food 
security interventions, helping reduce exposure 
to violence and improve the safety and dignity of 
affected people.
PAGE
22
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
ProGrAMMinG  
HiGHLiGH ts
Accountability to affected people 
Accountability to affected people (AAP) 
remained a central component of EHF-supported 
programming in 2025, with partners integrating 
feedback and complaint mechanisms across 
sectors and interventions. Community engagement 
approaches were embedded throughout project 
design and implementation, ensuring that affected 
people were informed, consulted and able to 
influence humanitarian assistance. These efforts 
were reinforced through partnerships with national 
and local organizations, including women-led 
organizations, placing affected communities at 
the centre of decision-making processes. 
The EHF-funded partners applied a range of 
AAP practices, including community feedback 
desks, hotline systems, complaint and 
response mechanisms and regular community 
consultations. These approaches helped ensure 
that assistance was aligned with priority needs 
and adapted to evolving contexts. In several 
projects, community feedback directly informed 
programme adjustments, including changes to 
targeting criteria, delivery modalities, and service 
locations, thereby improving the relevance and 
acceptance of assistance, particularly in hard-
to-reach and conflict-affected areas. Efforts 
were made to close the feedback loop by 
communicating back to communities on actions 
taken in response to their feedback.
Positive Action for Development (PAD) – a national humanitarian organization – implemented 
a structured complaints and feedback mechanism in Tigray. The system ensured systematic 
collection, tracking and response to community feedback through multiple channels, 
including hotlines, suggestion boxes and community meetings. All cases were registered, 
categorized and assigned timelines, with urgent and sensitive complaints addressed within 24 
hours and standard cases within five days. Feedback was communicated back to communities 
through preferred channels, ensuring transparency and accountability. The system also enabled 
analysis of trends and programmatic gaps, directly informing project adjustments and improving 
the quality and responsiveness of assistance.
Union of Ethiopian Women and Children Associations (UEWCA), a national women-led NGO, 
demonstrated how GBV risk mitigation can be integrated across sectors through multi-
sectoral response in conflict-affected woredas of Amhara. The project combined GBV case 
management, psychosocial support, emergency cash assistance and “dignity kit” distribution 
with broader humanitarian assistance. In one intervention, almost 12,000 community members 
were reached through awareness activities, while survivors received tailored support, including 
referrals and safe access to services. By linking protection with health, WASH and livelihoods 
support, the intervention helped reduce exposure to risks and strengthen safety and dignity in 
displacement settings.
Efforts were also made to ensure inclusive 
access to feedback mechanisms, including 
outreach to women, older persons and persons 
with disabilities. Community structures, including 
leaders and committees in sites for internally 
displaced people, played an important role in 
The EHF-funded projects also adopted 
inclusive targeting approaches, reaching 
internally displaced people, returnees and 
host communities, with particular attention to 
women and girls, people with disabilities and 
other vulnerable groups. More people were 
reached indirectly through improved community 
awareness, strengthened service delivery systems 
and enhanced protection infrastructure, extending 
the impact of GBV programming beyond direct 
service recipients. National organizations played a 
central role in delivering GBV services, particularly 
in areas with limited humanitarian access. 
facilitating communication between partners 
and affected people, helping ensure that feedback 
mechanisms were accessible and responsive to 
diverse needs.
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
PAGE
23
ProGrAMMinG  
HiGHLiGH ts
Organization for Social Services, Health and Development (OSSHD) implemented a 
community-centred accountability and coordination project in Tigray Region, reaching nearly 
135,000 people, including internally displaced people, returnees and host communities. The 
project established structured feedback and complaint mechanisms across 14 displacement sites, 
including suggestion boxes, complaint committees and community-led coordination platforms, 
alongside Area-Based Approach communication centres to facilitate access to information and 
services. The feedback mechanisms were actively used, with some 160 issues resolved. Community 
governance structures were strengthened through establishing Community Committees, training 
over 170 committee members, organizing around 40 site-level meetings which enabled internally 
displaced people to actively participate in decision-making, service monitoring and dispute 
resolution. 
Rapid response mechanism 
In 2025, the EHF-supported interventions 
contributed to rapid response efforts in 
areas affected by sudden shocks, including 
displacement, conflict escalation and disease 
outbreaks. Through the cost extension of Rapid 
Response Mechanism (RRM) project started in 
2024, the Fund enabled the timely delivery of life-
saving assistance in rapidly evolving situations.
The SWAN Consortium – a partnership of Save the 
Children International, World Vision International, 
Action Against Hunger, and the Norwegian Refugee 
Council, together with its national partners, OWS 
Development Fund (OWS-DF), Fayyaa Integrated 
Development Organization (FIDO), Ethiopian Red 
Cross Society (ERCS), Organization for Welfare and 
Development in Action (OWDA) and Development 
for Peace Organization (DPO)  - continued to be 
an important RRM in the country. Following the 
successful implementation of a US$4 million 
programme in 2024, the Consortium received a 
cost extension of $1.2 million from the EHF in 
2025, enabling the activation of 65 response plans, 
with a total response value of $1.67 million, to 
address emergency needs. Critical assistance 
was delivered across multiple regions, including 
how community-driven systems could be 
integrated into site management to strengthen 
accountability and, more broadly, ensure that 
humanitarian assistance remains aligned with 
evolving needs.
To strengthen partner capacity and institutionalize 
AAP practices, the EHF, in collaboration with 
the AAP Working Group in Ethiopia, organized 
two rounds of comprehensive AAP capacity-
strengthening trainings in Addis Ababa in 
December 2025. The sessions brought together 
48 participants (23 men and 25 women) from 37 
national NGOs implementing multi-sectoral EHF-
funded projects. The training modules focused 
on enhancing understanding of AAP principles 
and minimum standards, and on integrating AAP , 
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, 
safeguarding, Core Humanitarian Standard 
commitments, and gender, age and disability 
inclusion across humanitarian interventions.
These capacity-strengthening efforts resulted 
in concrete outcomes, with participating 
organizations developing actionable plans 
to institutionalize AAP within their systems, 
strengthen community participation, improve 
information-sharing practices and establish 
more inclusive feedback mechanisms. Within 
this broader effort, partners strengthened their 
AAP approaches by systematically integrating 
community engagement into project design 
and ensuring that information was clear and 
accessible to support informed participation. 
During implementation, organizations 
established safe and inclusive feedback 
mechanisms, including community committees, 
hotlines and suggestion boxes, designed in 
consultation with affected communities to reach 
vulnerable and marginalized groups.
At the inter-agency level, partners also 
strengthened coordination through regular 
engagement with the AAP Working Group, 
which brings together almost 70 humanitarian 
organizations, including participation in monthly 
meetings and contributions to collective 
community feedback platforms that recorded 
more than 2,500 submissions in 2025, of which 
93 per cent were addressed through established 
response pathways. By combining system-wide 
requirements, targeted capacity building and 
partner-driven initiatives, the EHF continued to 
embed accountability as a core component of 
humanitarian response, ensuring that affected 
communities play a central role in shaping the 
assistance they receive.
PAGE
24
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
ProGrAMMinG  
HiGHLiGH ts
A doctor conducts 
vaccination for livestock to 
protect animal health and 
safeguard the livelihoods of 
pastoralist families who rely 
on livestock for food and 
income.
March 2025,                  
Borena Zone, Oromia Region. 
Photo: UNOCHA/Manuel Morini
The SWAN Consortium delivered timely assistance to people displaced by an earthquake 
in Oromia, reaching affected communities within days of the shock. Through its national 
partner Fayyaa Integrated Development Organization (FIDO), mobile health and nutrition 
teams provided over 1,200 outpatient consultations, screened nearly 900 children and over 200 
pregnant and lactating women for malnutrition, and delivered mental health and psychosocial 
support to more than 500 people. Additional services included reproductive health care for 
nearly 400 women and health awareness activities reaching over 2,500 people. The response 
demonstrates how the EHF-funded partners rapidly deliver integrated life-saving assistance in 
hard-to-reach areas, combining clinical care, nutrition services and community outreach to address 
urgent needs in the immediate aftermath of sudden shocks.
Amhara, Tigray, Oromia, Afar, Somali, Central 
Ethiopia, Gambela and Southern Ethiopia. Rapid 
response interventions focused on delivering 
integrated multi-sectoral assistance, including 
emergency shelter, water, sanitation and hygiene, 
and health and protection services. The ability 
to mobilize partners quickly and deploy flexible 
funding was critical in contexts where delays could 
significantly increase humanitarian risks.
In displacement-affected areas, rapid response 
support helped address the immediate needs 
of newly displaced people, including access                   
to basic services and protection. In areas 
affected by disease outbreaks, rapid interventions 
supported containment efforts and continuity of 
essential services.
The EHF also contributed to the development of 
a harmonized RRM Operational Framework, led 
by the RRM coordination function within OCHA 
Ethiopia. This helped establish streamlined 
principles, scope, activation triggers and response 
modalities, strengthening coordination, and 
improving the effectiveness and predictability of 
rapid response across partners.
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
PAGE
25
ProGrAMMinG  
HiGHLiGH ts
Mums for Mums (MfM), an Ethiopian women-led humanitarian organization, implemented 
an integrated multi-sectoral project supporting internally displaced people returning 
to Eastern Tigray through deploying mobile teams to hard-to-reach areas. Assistance 
combined health, nutrition, protection and cash assistance. More than 2,000 families received 
one-off multi-purpose cash transfers, enabling them to meet immediate needs such as food, 
shelter and transportation during return and reintegration. Cash assistance was delivered through 
secure mechanisms, including bank transfers, and complemented by protection services, including 
risk screening and referral. Overall, the project reached over 50,000 people directly, with at least 
250,000 people benefiting indirectly through community-based outreach and awareness activities. 
Delivered in remote locations with limited infrastructure and logistical challenges, the intervention 
demonstrated that combining cash assistance with mobile service delivery can improve access to 
life-saving support and reduce barriers for people in underserved areas, and that cash assistance 
can be effectively integrated into broader humanitarian response to reduce protection risks and 
support early recovery.
Advancing cash and voucher assistance
In 2025, US$3.6 million of Ethiopia Humanitarian 
Fund allocations (approximately 8 per cent of total 
funding) were delivered through cash and voucher 
assistance (CVA) modalities. Multi-purpose cash 
accounted for $1.4 million of CVA programming, 
followed by conditional cash transfers at $1.1 
million and sector-specific unconditional cash 
transfers worth over $950,000. A smaller share of 
assistance, approximately $122,000, was delivered 
through unconditional vouchers.
National NGOs implemented the majority of cash-
based programming, managing $2.86 million 
of CVA allocations, while international NGOs 
implemented $742,000. The strong participation 
of national partners reflects the Fund’s continued 
commitment to localization and the role of local 
actors in delivering assistance directly to affected 
communities, particularly in hard-to-reach and 
access-constrained areas.
Cash-based assistance supported people in 
meeting essential needs across multiple sectors, 
including food security, livelihoods, shelter and 
other priority humanitarian needs. In displacement-
affected and crisis-affected areas, cash assistance 
enabled families to respond flexibly to rapidly 
changing needs, while also supporting access to 
services, including for vulnerable groups such as 
women and survivors of gender-based violence. 
By providing resources directly to affected people, 
CVA helped preserve dignity and choice while 
contributing to the local market functionality.
The combination of multi-purpose and conditional 
cash transfers allowed partners to balance 
flexibility with targeted support, ensuring that 
assistance addressed both immediate basic needs 
and sector-specific priorities. Cash modalities also 
enabled faster, more adaptable response than 
in-kind assistance, particularly in contexts where 
access constraints and logistical challenges 
limited traditional delivery approaches.
At the same time, the delivery of cash assistance 
faced operational constraints in some areas, 
including limited access to formal financial services 
and banking infrastructure. In such contexts, 
partners relied on direct cash distribution, which 
introduced additional operational and protection 
risks and required strengthened safeguards to 
ensure safe delivery, including adapted distribution 
modalities and enhanced risk mitigation measures 
for people receiving assistance and humanitarians.
The EHF continued to coordinate closely with 
the Cash Working Group and sectors to ensure 
complementarity with other humanitarian cash 
interventions and maintain alignment with national 
CVA standards and transfer values.
PAGE
26
EHF IN 
ACTION
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
EHF IN ACTION: WHEN WOMEN HAVE A SAFE SPACE, 
HOPE GROWS
For the past three years, Bulbul Town in Gumi Eldello 
district of Oromia Region has been home to Tena, a 
mother of six who was once forced to flee her village 
after conflict broke out in the area. Leaving everything 
behind was painful, but life in displacement brought 
new challenges. Violence against women and girls 
was common, including sexual abuse, yet most cases 
remained hidden and were endured in silence.
 “At that time, we had no place to talk about 
violence,” Tena says. “I did not know my rights or 
where to go if my children or I were harmed. I felt 
alone, stressed and afraid.”
Women were rarely included in community discussions 
or activities. There were no safe spaces for women to 
meet, learn or support one another. Many, like Tena, 
remained isolated and without access to information 
or services.
This began to change through a project supported by 
the OCHA-managed Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund 
(EHF), implemented by Mercy Corps together with 
Action for the Needy Ethiopia (ANE). First, Tena took 
part in a three-day training on violence against women 
and girls. She began attending regular activities at the 
Women and Girls Safe Space in Bulbul Town, facilitated 
by trained social workers.
 “The space became like a second home for us,” she 
explains.  “It is a place where we feel safe, respected 
and listened to.”
In a safe space, women and girls come together to 
discuss sensitive issues, access information, and 
support one another. Tena learned how to prevent 
violence, how to protect herself and her children, and 
where to seek help. Through referrals, survivors can 
access health care, legal assistance, protection services 
and psychosocial support. Women and girls also 
participate in skill-building and recreational activities 
that help rebuild confidence and a sense of normalcy.
Today, Tena is an active participant in the safe space 
and encourages others to join.
 “Now I not only can talk about violence and my 
rights, but I know exactly what to do if something 
happens to me or someone I know,” she says. “This 
knowledge gives me strength.”
Through the EHF funding, partners are supporting 
the establishment of safe spaces and strengthening 
protection services for women and girls affected by 
displacement. 
These interventions help ensure that survivors have 
access to information, services and support, while 
creating spaces where women and girls can reconnect, 
share experiences and begin to rebuild their sense of 
safety and dignity. Only in the Oromia region were five 
similar centres opened in 2025, and 34 more across the 
country. The EHF allocated US$10.1 million in 2025 to 
help nearly 530,000 people with gender-based violence 
services and support the survivors. 
Women community 
members displaced by 
conflict.
February 2025,             
Denbi Dolo town,              
Kelem Wellega,          
Oromia Region.
Photo: UNOCHA/Charlotte Cans
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
PAGE
27
Risk 
Management
In 2025, the Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund (EHF) 
continued to apply a comprehensive risk 
management framework aligned with the CBPF 
Global Guidelines, ensuring that risks associated 
with funding, partners and project implementation 
were systematically identified, monitored and 
mitigated. Risk management remained fully 
integrated across the programme cycle, combining 
capacity assessments, ongoing monitoring and 
assurance mechanisms, including audits and 
investigations. This approach enabled the Fund 
to balance the timely delivery of assistance in 
high-risk environments with strong accountability 
and oversight.
Risk management of projects
Throughout the year, the EHF continued to strength-
en project assurance through a combination of 
field monitoring, financial spot checks, oversight 
of reporting and audits. Monitoring remained risk-
based and focused on projects due for review 
under the operational modality, with priority given 
to higher-risk grants and contexts. 
The EHF conducted almost 90 monitoring visits, 
of which 80 were required under the Operational 
Manual, and all 80 were completed, with no 
monitoring exemptions recorded. By risk category, 
all required monitoring was completed for 20 high-
risk projects, 53 medium-risk projects and 7 low-
risk projects. The higher number of actual visits 
reflected additional follow-up undertaken beyond 
the minimum required level in some cases.
Financial oversight also remained strong. The EHF 
conducted 79 financial spot checks, of which 79 
were required and completed, with no exemptions. 
This included all required checks for 16 high-risk 
projects, 54 medium-risk projects and 9 low-risk 
projects, indicating a high level of compliance with 
assurance requirements. 
Overall, final reporting compliance remained 
strong in 2025. A total of 95 narrative reports 
(100 per cent target) and 95 financial reports                      
(100 per cent target) were submitted, representing 
full compliance across all three risk categories.
Audit coverage also remained substantial. In 2025, 
a total of 88 audits were initiated. Of these, 46 
audits were conducted in 2025, while 42 audits 
were moved to start in early 2026. In 2025, 64 audits 
were completed, although some had been initiated 
in previous years. Completed audits included 15 
high-risk, 34 medium-risk and 15 low-risk projects. 
As in previous years, closer coordination between 
programme, finance and compliance functions 
supported earlier identification of issues and 
follow-up on corrective action, including through 
the triangulation of findings from monitoring, spot 
checks and audits.
Monitoring activities in 2025 identified a range of 
operational and compliance-related challenges, 
consistent with implementation in complex 
humanitarian contexts. These included (i) delays in 
project implementation due to access constraints 
and insecurity, (ii) variations in partner reporting 
quality and documentation, (iii) procurement and 
financial management gaps in some projects and 
(iv) constraints affecting the timely delivery of 
assistance in remote areas. 
All identified issues were systematically followed 
up through corrective action plans, enhanced 
monitoring or additional partner support. The Fund 
used monitoring findings to engage partners as 
early as possible, agree on corrective actions and 
strengthen follow-up, including in hard-to-reach 
and newly accessible areas.
Risk management of partners
The EHF continued to manage partner risk through 
eligibility procedures, capacity assessments and 
the ongoing review of partner performance-
based scoring. The Fund worked with 47 partners 
implementing a total allocation envelope of
PAGE
28
Annu AL rEPort
EHF 2025
risK
MAn AGEMEnt
OVERVIEW 2025
17
18
1
7
NEWLY ELIGIBLE 
PARTNERS, 
INCLUDING 
REASSESSMENTS 
REASSESSMENT
CONDUCTED 
REPORTED AND 
CLOSED  INCIDENTS
FULL CAPACITY 
ASSESSMENTS 
CONDUCTED 
UPDATED RISK LEVEL BASED ON PERFORMANCE INDEX 
Allocations in US$
US$44.2 million. Partner oversight remained 
anchored in the Partner Performance Index, 
with partner risk levels reviewed and updated 
through the Grant Management System twice 
during the year. Partners whose risk levels had 
changed received a detailed account of the 
reasons therefore. By the end of 2025, the EHF 
had 22 low-risk partners, 3 national NGOs, 5 
international NGOs and 14 UN agencies. Sixty 
organizations maintained a medium-risk rating: 
22 national and 38 international NGOs. Twenty-
seven partners were rated as high risk: 24 national 
and 3 international NGOs.
This performance-based approach allowed the 
EHF to calibrate oversight measures to partner 
capacity and track record, while maintaining 
access to funding for best-placed partners, 
including national partners operating in complex 
environments.
As in previous years, partner-related risk 
management was not limited to compliance 
control. It also served to identify capacity gaps 
and tailor support accordingly. Findings from 
project monitoring, spot checks, audits and 
partner performance reviews informed targeted 
follow-up with partners and contributed to 
risk-informed decision-making on funding and 
oversight arrangements.
The number of eligible partners further increased 
in 2025, marking a stable upward trend towards 
localization. Following the eligibility process 
launched in 2024, the EHF conducted 18 capacity 
assessments of local partners within the 34 
previously prioritized applications. By the end 
of the year, the Fund had 109 eligible partners 
(49 national NGOs, 46 international NGOs and 
14 UN partners)
Risk management of funding 
Risk management of funding remained an 
important element of the Fund’s overall assurance 
framework in 2025. The EHF conducted four 
training sessions on risk management, oversight, 
non-compliance and fraud for partners. Twenty-
one action plans were developed and monitored 
to address findings from capacity assessments, 
monitoring and audits.
In 2025, seven incidents were reported for Ethiopia 
across categories such as fraud, destruction of 
aid, diversion and mismanagement. As in previous 
years, reported incidents were to be understood 
as part of the Fund’s broader accountability 
framework, rather than solely as indications of 
loss or misuse. What remained important was that 
Asefu, a mother of two who 
fled violence in Ambo in the 
Oromia Region, picks up 
crops near her makeshift 
home. Supported with a 
small grant through an NGO 
funded by the EHF she also 
managed to launch a small 
business to sell household 
essentials in the camp.                    
May 2025,                                   
Debre Berhan town,             
Amhara Region.
Photo: UNOCHA/Charlotte Cans
Annu AL rEPort
EHF 2025
PAGE
29
risK
MAn AGEMEnt
OVERVIEW 2025
17
18
1
7
NEWLY ELIGIBLE 
PARTNERS, 
INCLUDING 
REASSESSMENTS 
REASSESSMENT
CONDUCTED 
REPORTED AND 
CLOSED  INCIDENTS
FULL CAPACITY 
ASSESSMENTS 
CONDUCTED 
UPDATED RISK LEVEL BASED ON PERFORMANCE INDEX 
Allocations in US$
incidents were reported, reviewed and addressed 
in line with CBPF procedures. The Fund maintained 
a zero-tolerance approach to fraud and misuse of 
funds, while ensuring that reporting mechanisms 
remained accessible and trusted by partners.
Building on improvements introduced in previous 
years, the EHF continued to strengthen its audit 
planning and oversight processes, including 
the early initiation of audit firm selection, which 
contributed to more timely audit completions. 
Further enhancements in risk management were 
achieved through closer collaboration across 
programme, finance and compliance functions, 
enabling improved triangulation of monitoring 
data and earlier identification of issues. This 
approach allowed the Fund to support partners 
in addressing implementation challenges and to 
take timely action in cases of non-compliance.
Overall, risk levels in 2025 remained manageable 
and consistent with the operational context, 
characterized by access constraints, insecurity 
and capacity gaps among partners. Key mitigation 
measures included: risk-based monitoring and 
prioritization; strengthened partner capacity 
support; enhanced tracking of recommendations 
and corrective actions; recovery actions where 
applicable; strengthened controls to prevent 
recurrence; and continued investment in training 
and awareness on compliance and fraud 
prevention. This approach enabled the EHF to 
deliver humanitarian assistance at scale while 
maintaining robust accountability, transparency 
and oversight mechanisms.
IMPLEMENTATION BY PARTNER RISK LEVEL TYPE
PAGE
30
EHF IN 
ACTION
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
EHF IN ACTION: FIGHTING CHILD MALNUTRITION IN 
SHALLA DISTRICT . THE STORY OF SAHRA AND RONDI
When 24-month-old Sahra and Rondi arrived at Fanda 
Health Centre, they were too weak to eat, their small 
bodies swollen from severe malnutrition. Sahra’s 
mother, Shaga, feared the worst. 
 “I thought I would lose my child, but the care giv-
en by the health workers and World Vision saved 
her life,” she recalled.
Shalla district in the Oromia Region has a population 
of nearly 25,000 people. Many children are vulnerable 
to malnutrition due to recurring drought and limited 
food availability. Poor feeding practices and frequent 
childhood illnesses further increase risks, often leading 
to severe and complicated malnutrition. Stabilization 
centers play a critical role in reducing deaths among 
children under five.
With support from the OCHA-managed Ethiopia 
Humanitarian Fund (EHF), World Vision Ethiopia 
contributed to the Government’s Community-
Based Management of Acute Malnutrition (CMAM) 
programme in the district. Services were provided 
through eight health centers, each equipped with a 
stabilization centre for children with severe acute 
malnutrition and medical complications. 
 “We provide 24-hour care because these children 
need close attention,” said a nurse at Shalla Health 
Centre. “Without stabilization centres, many 
children would not survive.”
Sahra was admitted to Fanda Health Centre a few 
months ago in a critical condition. She was weak, 
with persistent diarrhoea, loss of appetite, skin 
problems and severe swelling. Shaga, a mother of 
seven, described the challenges of feeding her family 
from a small plot of land. Despite her efforts, she was 
unable to provide sufficient food to keep Sahra healthy.
Sahra remained in the stabilization centre for 12 days, 
receiving therapeutic milk, routine medical treatment 
and continuous monitoring. Over time, her condition 
improved: the swelling reduced, her appetite returned, 
and she became more active. She was discharged 
in stable condition and referred to the Outpatient 
Therapeutic Programme to continue treatment at home. 
During this time, her mother also received nutrition 
counselling, hygiene education and caregiver support, 
including food and small cash assistance. 
 “When I saw my daughter begin to eat again and 
smile, I knew she was coming back,” Shaga said. 
“Today, she is playful and full of energy.”
Rondi, also 24 months old, faced similar challenges. 
He was referred from Labu Subka village by health 
extension workers after failing the appetite test and 
showing signs of severe acute malnutrition, including 
wasting, diarrhoea and swelling. His mid-upper 
arm circumference was less than 10 cm, indicating 
a life-threatening condition. Rondi remained at the 
stabilization centre for 7 days until his condition 
improved steadily, and he was discharged to continue 
treatment through outpatient services, where his 
progress will be followed.
Through the EHF funding, partners can sustain these 
life-saving services in areas affected by recurrent 
drought and food insecurity, ensuring that children 
with severe acute malnutrition receive timely 
treatment. By strengthening facility-based care 
alongside community-level detection and referral, 
the intervention contributes to reducing preventable 
deaths and improving recovery outcomes for the most 
vulnerable children.
A medical worker measures 
Rondi’s malnutrition levels 
after completing nutrition 
treatment as part of 
community based nutrition 
interventions by World 
Vision Ethiopia, funded 
by EHF . 
June 2025,        
Shashemene woreda,          
West Arsi zone,                  
Oromia Region.
Photo: World Vision/Bethel Shiferaw
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
PAGE
31
AnnEXEs
Annexes
 
Annexes list
32 ANNEX A  
33 ANNEX B    
Annexes title
2025 EHF ADVISORY BOARD
COMMON PERFORMANCE FRAMEWORK
PAGE
32
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
AnnEXEs
ANNEX A  
2025 EHF ADVISORY BOARD
STAKEHOLDER ORGANIZATION
Chairperson un resident and Humanitarian coordinator (rc/Hc )
INGO Humanitarian inGo Forum (HinGo)
INGO international orthodox christian charities (iocc )
INGO ActionAid
INGO World Vision
NNGO Fayyaa integrated Development organization (FiDo)
NNGO union of Ethiopian Women and children Associations (uEWcA)
NNGO Women Empowerment Action (WE-Action)
UN Food and Agriculture organization (FA o)
UN international organization for Migration (ioM)
UN World Food Programme (WFP)
Donor italy
Donor Luxemburg 
Donor ireland
Observer u.s. Agency for international Development (usAiD)
EHF/OCHA United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
Principle 1
INCLUSIVENESS
A broad range of humanitarian partner 
organizations (UN agencies and NGOs) participates in 
CBPF processes and receive funding to implement 
projects addressing identified priority needs.
Principle 2
FLEXIBILITY
The programmatic focus and funding 
priorities of CBPFs are set at the country level 
and may shift rapidly, especially in volatile 
humanitarian contexts. CBPFs are able to adapt 
rapidly to changing priorities and allow 
humanitarian partners to identify appropriate 
solutions to address humanitarian needs in the 
most effective way.
Principle 5
RISK  MANAGEMENT  
CBPFs manage risk and effectively monitor partner 
capacity and performance. CBPFs utilize a full 
range of accountability tools and measures.
Principle 4
EFFICIENCY
Management of all processes related to CBPFs 
enables timely and strategic responses to 
identified humanitarian needs. CBPFs seek to 
employ effective disbursement mechanisms, 
minimizing trans¬action costs while operating in 
a transparent and accountable manner.
Principle 3
TIMELINESS
CBPFs allocate funds and save lives as 
humanitarian needs emerge or escalate.
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
PAGE
33
Principle 1
INCLUSIVENESS
A broad range of humanitarian partner 
organizations (UN agencies and NGOs) participates in 
CBPF processes and receive funding to implement 
projects addressing identified priority needs.
Principle 2
FLEXIBILITY
The programmatic focus and funding 
priorities of CBPFs are set at the country level 
and may shift rapidly, especially in volatile 
humanitarian contexts. CBPFs are able to adapt 
rapidly to changing priorities and allow 
humanitarian partners to identify appropriate 
solutions to address humanitarian needs in the 
most effective way.
Principle 5
RISK  MANAGEMENT  
CBPFs manage risk and effectively monitor partner 
capacity and performance. CBPFs utilize a full 
range of accountability tools and measures.
Principle 4
EFFICIENCY
Management of all processes related to CBPFs 
enables timely and strategic responses to 
identified humanitarian needs. CBPFs seek to 
employ effective disbursement mechanisms, 
minimizing trans¬action costs while operating in 
a transparent and accountable manner.
Principle 3
TIMELINESS
CBPFs allocate funds and save lives as 
humanitarian needs emerge or escalate.
The CBPFs measures 
its performance against 
a management tool 
that provides a set of 
indicators to assess how 
well a Fund performs 
in relation to the 
policy objectives and 
operational standards 
set out in the CBPF 
Global Guidelines. This 
common methodology 
enables management and 
stakeholders involved in 
the governance of the 
Funds to identify, analyze 
and address challenges in 
reaching and maintaining 
a well-performing CBPF . 
CBPFs embody 
the fundamental 
humanitarian 
principles of humanity, 
impartiality, neutrality 
and independence, and 
function according to a 
set of specific principles: 
Inclusiveness, Flexibility, 
Timeliness, Efficiency, 
Accountability and Risk 
Management.
INCLUSIVE GOVERNANCE
INCLUSIVE PROGRAMMING
INCLUSIVE IMPLEMENTATION
INCLUSIVE ENGAGEMENT
INCLUSIVE RESPONSE
EFFICIENT SCALE 
EFFICIENT PRIORITIZATION
EFFICIENT COVERAGE
EFFICIENT MANAGEMENT
EFFICIENT MANAGEMENT
RISK MANAGEMENT OF PROJECTS
RISK MANAGEMENT OF FUNDING
RISK MANAGEMENT OF PARTNERS
ANNEX B    
COMMON PERFORMANCE FRAMEWORK
1
2
3
4
5
FLEXIBLE ASSISTANCE
FLEXIBLE OPERATION
FLEXIBLE ALLOCATION PROCESS
FLEXIBLE IMPLEMENTATION
6
7
8
9
TIMEL Y ALLOCATION
TIMEL Y DISBURSEMENTS 
TIMEL Y CONTRIBUTIONS
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
PAGE
34
ANNUAL REPORT
EHF 2025
UNOCHA.ORG/ETHIOPIA
GMS.UNOCHA.ORG
FTS.UNOCHA.ORG
CRISISRELIEF .UN.ORG
CBPF .DATA.UNOCHA.ORG
SOCIAL MEDIA
 @EHF_ETHIOPA | @UNOCHA