Home
                    


 







                        Americas
                    








Live


Live: Colombia heads to the polls to elect President Gustavo Petro's successor






Issued on: 
31/05/2026 - 22:25
Modified: 
31/05/2026 - 22:50
 


















Ivan Cepeda, Paloma Valencia and Abelardo de la Espriella are the three leading candidates in Colombia's presidential election, the first round of which was held on May 31, 2026.
 
© Raul Arboleda, Sergio Yate, Luis Acosta, AFP
 















                                Colombians vote on Sunday for what is likely to be a first round of presidential elections to choose between a reformist left wing seeking to retain power following a historic victory four years ago and a hard-line right wing promising greater security in the face of escalating violence by armed groups. Polls show left-wing Senator Ivan Cepeda, an ally of outgoing President Gustavo Petro, leading the first round. Follow FRANCE 24's coverage and election results with our team based in Bogota.            




The key issues in this presidential election: 
 
Around 41.4 million Colombians are eligible to vote in the first round of the presidential election, including 1.4 million living abroad.
 
 
Polling stations will be open this Sunday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m (Bogota GMT-5). across the country, with 11 candidates in the race.
 
Iván Cepeda leads the polls, followed by Abelardo de la Espriella and Paloma Valencia.
 
No candidate is expected to secure an absolute majority, making a runoff on June 21 likely.
 
To win in the first round, a candidate must obtain more than half of the valid votes cast.
 
 
 
 
Here are the key moments from the May 31 voting day to elect Colombia’s next president, reported by our France 24 Spanish team in Bogotá:
 
Read more
 








31/05/2026 - 22:50
Colombia votes calmly despite electoral risk alerts


Election day in Colombia has unfolded relatively smoothly despite some isolated incidents. The Electoral Observation Mission (MOE) reported clashes between illegal armed groups in a rural area of Tibú, in the Catatumbo region, as well as the detonation of an explosive device in the department of Caquetá. 
For his part, National Registrar Hernán Penagos said the main issue occurred in a rural area of Urrao, where weather conditions delayed the delivery of electoral materials and led to the late opening of two polling stations, a situation that was later resolved.
In Medellín, long lines and complaints were also reported after a polling station was relocated to the 11th floor of a shopping mall, making access difficult for elderly voters and others.
In ten minutes, polling stations will close across the country.






31/05/2026 - 22:23
 
Welcome to our coverage of the Colombian presidential election. We’ll be broadcasting live from Bogotá and our studios in Paris. 




































6






As it happened





                                    Middle East
                            


















Keywords for this article