08/06/2026 - 11:13
Iran Guards target petrochemical facility in Israel


Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps said they had targeted a petrochemical facility in Israel in retaliation for an attack on a similar site in southwestern Iran.
"The Aerospace Force of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, in response to the aggression of the American-Zionist enemy against a petrochemical industry facility, targeted similar industrial facilities in Haifa with missile strikes a few moments ago," the Guards' official media outlet Sepah News said.
They also warned that Israel "has initiated a dangerous game, the scope of which will encompass all energy-related targets in the region", blaming the US for any consequences for the global economy.






08/06/2026 - 10:42
'Hostile drone' downed over Tehran, says Iranian media


Local media in Iran said that a "hostile drone" was shot down over the capital Tehran during the new round of fighting with Israel.
"A hostile drone belonging to the American-Zionist enemy was targeted and destroyed by air defences in the skies over Tehran," the Mehr news agency reported, without elaborating.






08/06/2026 - 10:18
Massive blast heard in Tehran


A huge blast rocked central Tehran, an AFP journalist reported, followed by repeated explosions believed to be from air defence systems in the capital.
The initial explosion shook the premises of the foreign ministry in central Tehran, where an AFP journalist was attending a weekly press conference.
"The exact location and source of this explosion are still unknown," local media, including Fars news agency, reported, adding that "simultaneously, air defence was also activated in some parts of Tehran".






08/06/2026 - 10:13
Iran says continuing US exchanges through Pakistani mediators


Iran said that Pakistan's mediation efforts to end the war with the United States were continuing even after fighting resumed with Israel. 
"Diplomatic consultations are naturally continuing in all circumstances," said Iranian foreign ministry spokesman Esmaeil Baqaei.






08/06/2026 - 09:59
Israel and Iran trade fire in most serious confrontation since April truce


Israel and Iran fired at each other while Yemen's Houthi rebels launched a missile at Israel and threatened to disrupt Red Sea shipping. It’s the most serious escalation since a ceasefire began two months ago and threatens to plunge the Middle East back into war.
Two men examine a fallen rocket half-buried in the ground on the outskirts of Jericho on June 8, 2026, following Iranian and Iran-backed Houthi rebel attacks. © Ahmad Gharabli, AFP






08/06/2026 - 09:40
China hopes Israel and Iran maintain ceasefire


China said it was "deeply concerned" Monday by fresh attacks between Israel and Iran, expressing hope that a fragile truce in the Middle East war would be respected.
"Resuming hostilities is not in any party's interest," foreign ministry spokesman Lin Jian told a news briefing, adding: "It is hoped all relevant parties will fulfil their commitment to a ceasefire."






08/06/2026 - 09:31
Iran blames US for latest exchange of fire with Israel


Overnight ​exchange of ​fire between Iran and Israel will only ​worsen ‌a "chaotic ⁠diplomatic process" with ‌the United States, ⁠Iran's Foreign Ministry spokesperson said , and ‌will further exacerbate Tehran's ‌suspicion toward Washington.
Esmaeil ​Baghaei added that the US bears direct responsibility ​for recent ​ceasefire ​breaches and that ​Israel does not take independent action without consulting ⁠Washington.






08/06/2026 - 09:21
Trump is 'desperate for a deal with the devilish Tehran regime', says Israeli paper






08/06/2026 - 08:47
Talks begin in Cairo on advancing fragile Gaza ceasefire


Talks on advancing the fragile Gaza ceasefire have begun in Cairo between mediators and Palestinian factions, a Palestinian source familiar with the meeting told AFP.
The discussions, which started Sunday and are set to resume Monday, come as violence continues to plague the territory despite the truce in place since October.
The talks bring together mediators Egypt, Qatar and Turkey, along with representatives of several Palestinian factions, as efforts continue to push forward negotiations on the second phase of the ceasefire agreement between Israel and Hamas.
According to the source, mediators were due to meet a Hamas delegation before midday on Monday, followed by a wider meeting including all participating factions.






08/06/2026 - 08:35
Israel warns a third barrage of missiles is incoming from Iran






08/06/2026 - 08:34
Middle East 'does not need an escalation', EU top diplomat says


EU top diplomat Kaja Kallas urged calm Monday after Iran and Israel traded strikes, testing a fragile truce and threatening hopes for a deal to end the Middle East war.
"Overnight, we have seen escalation again. I think the region does not need an escalation, but actually that parties sit down to a negotiation table and agree," Kallas said. 






08/06/2026 - 08:11
Yemen's Iran-backed Houthis ban Israeli maritime navigation in the Red Sea


Yemen's Iran-backed Houthis said they will ban Israeli maritime navigation in the Red Sea.






08/06/2026 - 07:23
Iran Guards strike two air bases in Israel






08/06/2026 - 07:21
Israel struck petrochemical company, says Iranian media


Iranian media said Israel had struck a petrochemical company at Mahshahr in southwestern Iran, as the warring countries traded fire hours after US President Donald Trump called for restraint.
"The Zionist enemy has carried out an air attack on the Karoon Petrochemical Company in Mahshahr," local media posted on Telegram.
It quoted a local law enforcement official as saying that Israeli projectiles struck the facility.






08/06/2026 - 06:44
Israeli army identifies new missiles launched from Iran


The Israeli military said it had identified a second wave of missiles launched from Iran and its defensive systems were working to intercept them.
"Defensive systems are operating to intercept the threat," the military said.






08/06/2026 - 06:14
Explosions heard over Jerusalem as Israel says Iran has launched missiles at it


Israel's Iron Dome air defense system fires to intercept missiles launched from Iran over central Israel Monday, June 8, 2026. 
© 
Ohad Zwigenberg, AP 






08/06/2026 - 05:00
Missile launched from Yemen, Israeli military says 


The Israeli army said Monday it was working to intercept a missile launched from Yemen.
Yemen's Houthi rebels, who joined the Middle East war in March in support of Iran, have previously launched attacks on Israel.
The Israel Defense Forces wrote on Telegram that it "has identified the launch of a missile from Yemen toward Israeli territory, aerial defence systems are operating to intercept the threat."






08/06/2026 - 04:37
Saudi Arabia sounds missile alert in area home to the Prince Sultan Air Base, which hosts US forces






08/06/2026 - 03:35
Explosions heard in Tehran and throughout country


Iranian state TV reported explosions in three cities on Monday, as the Israeli army said its air forces had struck targets in western and central Iran.
"Several explosions heard in Tehran, Tabriz and Isfahan," state TV posted on Telegram.