TAIPEI — Taiwan’s government said on Friday it had not received any information about U.S. arms sales delays, after a senior U.S. official suggested there was a pause due to the need to have enough arms for the war with Iran.
Taiwan, which China views as its own territory, has been waiting for the U.S. to approve a new arms sale package which Reuters has reported could be worth up to $14 billion.
However, U.S. President Donald Trump said following a summit with China’s Xi Jinping in Beijing last week that he was undecided on whether to approve it.
On Thursday, U.S. Acting Navy Secretary Hung Cao was asked at a Senate Appropriations Defense Subcommittee hearing about future arms sales to Taiwan.
“We have done some foreign military sales to them. It’s just right now we’re doing a pause in order to make sure we have the munitions we need for Epic Fury - which we have plenty,” he said, referring to the U.S. operation against Iran.
“But we’re just making sure we have everything, but then the foreign military sales will continue when the administration deems necessary,” he said, adding it would be up to Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth and the Secretary of State Marco Rubio on whether to approve the sales to Taiwan.
Speaking to reporters in Taipei, Taiwan Presidential Office spokesperson Karen Kuo said they had noted the remarks.
“However, at present we have not received any relevant information about the U.S. adjusting these military sales,” she said.
Taiwan’s defense ministry said it also had not received any notification of arms sales delays.
The ministry continues to “monitor U.S. security cooperation policy” and maintain close coordination and communication with the U.S. to ensure that arms sales proceed according to plan, it said in a statement.
The U.S. is bound by law to provide Taiwan with the means to defend itself. China has repeatedly called for the U.S. to stop arms sales.
Taiwan’s government rejects Beijing’s sovereignty claims, saying only the Taiwanese people can decide their future.