Key takeaways
Attacks condemned:
 IMO condemned deadly overnight strikes on shipping near the Strait of Hormuz
Context:
 Strikes follow the February war launched by Israel and the US against Iran and subsequent attacks on US allies and assets in the Gulf by Tehran, with a prior interim ceasefire agreement that had aimed to secure safe shipping corridors
Escalation:
 Multiple ships have now been hit in the Strait, a route once carrying 20 per cent of oil and gas exports
Call to action:
 IMO urged restraint and dialogue to protect seafarers and freedom of navigation before the crisis worsens
“
We are gravely concerned by the latest attacks
,” an IMO spokesperson said, adding that the agency is urgently working with authorities to confirm the circumstances.
“IMO wholly condemns these attacks. The cycle of escalation must end.”
The maritime agency has been working with parties in the region after Israel and the United States began an intense bombing campaign against Iran in late February drawing counterstrikes across the Gulf against US allies by Tehran. 
Recent days have seen a major escalation in strikes, which has broken the fragile interim truce established under the US-Iran Memorandum of Understanding signed in mid-June.
The IMO’s efforts to alleviate the closure of the strait since hostilities erupted include establishing evacuation routes for ships stuck in the critical commercial waterway through which 20 per cent of oil and natural gas exports used to pass.
Calls for restraint
All parties have a responsibility to show restraint, avoid further escalation and return to dialogue, IMO said.
The escalation which began last week has seen multiple strikes on ships trying to navigate the Strait of Hormuz.
“
IMO urges all parties to choose the path that protect seafarers’ lives and the freedom of navigation
, so that this dangerous situation does not spiral further out of control,” the IMO spokesperson said.
Attacks must stop now: Türk
“Reports on the closure of the Strait of Hormuz are very alarming for their impact on human rights far beyond the region,” said Volker Türk , 
UN human rights chief
 on Tuesday. “
It is a vital lifeline on which millions are reliant
.”
Disruptions to the flow of food, medicines, and other necessary commodities have severe socioeconomic and humanitarian consequences, both regionally and globally, he continued, adding that diplomacy, restraint and de-escalation must be prioritised.”
Reported attacks by Iran and the US “must stop immediately”, Mr. Türk said, urging an immediate return to the ceasefire and its implementation consistent with international law. 
20,000 seafarers at risk
Throughout the months-long war, the UN maritime agency has been closely monitoring developments to protect more than 20,000 seafarers in the region, including those stranded on vessels unable to exit the Strait of Hormuz. 
In June, IMO managed to safely evacuate around 11,000 seafarers but paused the initiative on 25 June following a string of attacks.
IMO is also participating in a UN-led dedicated 
Task Force on the Strait of Hormuz
, established in March 2026.
Learn more about the task force 
here
.