The 
US
 Senate voted early on Friday morning to provide the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) with an additional $70 billion (roughly €60 billion) for immigration enforcement. 


The bill provides three years of funding for US Border Patrol and what under President 
Donald Trump
 became the largest and best funded federal law enforcement agency in US history, 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement
, more commonly known by its acronym ICE.


The expansion of ICE's powers and personnel has been a source of friction and public protest throughout Trump's second term. 


Thursday's session in the Capitol ran past midnight
Image: Bonnie Cash/UPI Photo/newscom/picture alliance


What happened in the Senate? 


Senators voted 52-47 in favor the bill, with no support from the Democrats. One Republican opposed it. 


The funding provided by ‌the bill ​would help pay for Trump's controversial 
migrant
 deportation crackdown over the next three years.


The bill follows 
a partial shutdown of the DHS earlier this year
, when Democrats refused to support new money for immigration enforcement without restrictions on tactics such as raids in sensitive locations and the use of masks by officers.


Republicans rejected those demands, instead choosing to fund ICE and Border Patrol through the fast-track "budget reconciliation" process, which allows them to bypass Democratic opposition if they can keep their own members united.


The vote only took place in the early hours of Friday morning because Thursday's session ran long with a series of secondary debates and disputes.


The vote followed a week after public protests outside the ICE detention center in Delaney Hall, Newark, New Jersey
Image: Eduardo Munoz/AFP


Which unrelated issues also featured in the lengthy Senate debate? 


Dissatisfaction with 
the $1.8 billion so-called "anti-weaponization" fund
 that could compensate Trump's allies for allgeations the government mistreated them played a larger part in the marathon session. 


Senate Republican Leader John Thune said the fund was a "settled issue," citing Attorney General Todd Blanche's testimony in Congress saying that the Department of Justice would not move forward with it. 


However, given Trump telling reporters on Wednesday, "I love ​it. I think it's so important," some Senators were not satisfied that it had been ditched. 


Thune tried to argue the matter was resolved.


"I find it very hard to believe that they're going to submit somebody who sat in front of a committee in ​the House and made definitive statements about this and then somehow all of a sudden turn around and go back on them," Thune told reporters. "I don't think that's going to happen."


A rival bill from Democrat Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer to kill the anti-weaponization fund entirely won support from a trio of Republicans — Susan Collins, Jon Husted and Dan Sullivan — and brought the session to a largely procedural halt for several hours. 


The debate also featured discussions on proposals to prohibit the use of federal funds and even private donations to build 
the lavish White House ballroom
 Trump often champions, with critics saying it is over budget and behind schedule. 


With Trump's approval ratings wobbling amid 
the war in Iran
, and midterm elections nearing in November, when one third of Senators will face elections, several of the president's policies have prompted criticism from within Republic ranks. 


These include but are not limited to the seemingly sidelined anti-weaponization fund, the ballroom and naming political ally Bill Pulte as US intelligence chief, despite his background in business and real estate.


US gas prices soar as Iran standoff fuels oil market fears
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that 
supports HTML5 video


What happens next? 


The bill still needs to clear the lower chamber of Congress, the House of Representatives. 


Republicans hope this vote can be finalized early next week. The bill would then return to the White House for Trump's signature. 


Don't let the algorithm hide the news. If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your 
Preferred Source on Google by clicking here
 and hitting the "star" or "preferred" button, so you'll always see our verified news first.


Edited by: 
Saim Dušan Inayatullah