Climate outlook signals rising drought risks and food insecurity 
On 25 June, the National Flood Taskforce 
reported that seasonal forecasts indicate 
a high likelihood of below-average rainfall 
and above-average temperatures across 
much of South Sudan during the June– 
September rainy season. River monitoring 
shows that water levels remain below 
seasonal norms in several locations, 
including Juba, Bor and Mangalla, 
suggesting a slower onset of flooding 
compared with recent years. However, 
forecasts point to elevated drought and 
water-stress risks, particularly in Eastern 
Equatoria, the Greater Pibor Administrative 
Area and northern Upper Nile, where some 
of the highest temperature anomalies 
are expected. Early impact is already 
emerging, with the Office of the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
(UNHCR) reporting that about 1,500 people 
have moved from areas around Kapoeta 
in Eastern Equatoria towards Kenya 
due to water scarcity and deteriorating 
livelihoods. A significant number of women 
and children in Kapoeta reportedly intend to 
move to Kenya but lack the financial means, 
indicating that additional population 
movements may occur in the coming days. 
While localized flooding remains possible, 
the overall outlook indicates an increased 
risk of drought conditions, water shortages, 
livestock losses and reduced agricultural 
production, especially in the eastern and 
south-eastern areas. In response, the Flood 
Taskforce is updating national risk
scenarios and will finalize a revised 
preparedness and response plan covering 
both flood and drought contingencies. 
Meanwhile, the latest Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
and the United Nations World Food 
Programme (WFP) Hunger Hotspots 
report has highlights South Sudan as one 
of the four countries of highest global 
concern, driven by the scale and severity 
of acute food insecurity. An estimated 
7.8 million people are classified in IPC 
Phase 3 (Crisis)  or above during the lean 
season, according to the latest Integrated 
Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) 
analysis. The combined effects of conflict, 
climatic shocks, economic pressures and 
funding shortfalls are expected to worsen 
conditions through the second half of 2026. 
The projectedclimate outlook, alongside 
displacement, disease outbreaks and 
declining humanitarian funding, is likely 
to further exacerbate food insecurity 
and malnutrition, particularly in already 
vulnerable areas.
Jonglei State: significant return movements 
in Akobo East drive humanitarian needs
Return movements to Akobo East in Jonglei 
State have been substantial, with nearly 
the entire population reported to have 
returned. This includes more than 86,400 
host community members, returnees 
and Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) 
residing in Nyandit, Bilkey, Dengjok
SOUTH SUDAN 
HUMANITARIAN
UPDATE
As of 26 June 2026
A boat with new arrivals (mostly mothers and children) docks at Dengjok Payam 
with IDP returnees from Tiergol in Ethiopia on 24 June 2026. Several people are still 
returning home to Akobo after fleeing clashes in March 2026.  
Photo: ©OCHA/ Doreen Kansiime
HIGHLIGHTS
• Latest seasonal forecasts 
indicate a high likelihood of 
below-average rainfall and 
above-average temperatures 
across much of South Sudan 
during the June–September 
rainy season.
• A substantial number of IDPs 
have reportedly returned 
to Akobo following an 
improvement in the security 
situation.
• An estimated 22,000 people 
in Udier Payam, Longochuk 
County, are in urgent need 
of humanitarian assistance, 
according to a recently 
concluded Inter-Agency Rapid 
Needs Assessment.
• The Emergency Relief 
Coordinator, Tom Fletcher, 
has announced an allocation 
of US$6 million for Ebola 
operational readiness in South 
Sudan.
2
HUMANITARIAN UPDATE: As of 26 June 2026
For further information, please contact: OCHA Public Information Officer
E-mail: doreen.kansiime@un.org
and Gagdong payams. Of the 93,200 people targeted, WFP 
has verified over 75,000 people for food assistance across 
Bilkey, Nyandit, Dengjok and Gagdong payams. Latest 
seasonal forecasts indicate a high likelihood of below-
average rainfall and above-average temperatures across 
much of South Sudan during the June– September rainy 
season.
As of 17 June, 45,200 people have been reached, with 
food distributions ongoing to cover the remaining verified 
beneficiaries and respond to evolving needs. In addition, 
about 11,200 IDPs from neighbouring Nyirol and Uror 
counties, as well as Akobo West, are currently hosted in 
Akobo East, including in Akobo Town, increasing pressure 
on limited resources and services. Needs have been 
assessed as high across sectors, with health, nutrition, 
water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), protection and food 
consistently identified as top priorities. The nutrition status 
of children is particularly alarming. Malnutrition screening 
of 13,401 children of age 5 identified 2,308 with severe 
acute malnutrition (SAM) and 4,487 with moderate acute 
malnutrition (MAM). The United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF) distributed ready-to-use therapeutic food to 
children with SAM during the assessment, and it remains 
a top priority in the response. priority in the response.
Inadequate safe water increases disease outbreak risk in 
Akobo County
The collapse of water and sanitation systems has created 
an extreme risk of disease outbreaks. Before the conflict, 
17 water towers and 35 boreholes supplied Akobo through 
an underground network; these were destroyed or looted. 
As of 23 June, only 8 hand pumps remain functional, 
enough to serve about 5,000 people out of a population 
of over 100,000. Most people are still relying on untreated 
river water, and open defecation is widespread, increasing 
sanitation concerns. With malaria transmission already 
accelerating and the rainy season intensifying, there is 
extreme risk of waterborne disease outbreaks, including 
cholera, which has been spreading in Jonglei State since 
February. As of 21 June, humanitarian partners restored 
water supply to Akobo Hospital, supplying about 90,000 
litres of water daily to the hospital and 15 community 
water points serving an estimated 20,000 people in Akobo 
Town. In parallel, daily infection prevention and control 
and environmental activities have been conducted; these 
include drainage excavation to reduce standing water, 
grass cutting for vector control, and deep cleaning and 
disinfection of hospital wards to improve conditions for 
patients.
Authorities call for assistance to IDP returnees in Akobo 
West and Canal/Pigi County
Over 21,000 conflict-affected people, including IDPs, are in 
urgent need of humanitarian assistance, particularlyshelter, 
non-food items (NFIs) and protection, according to 
authorities in Walgak, Akobo West. Humanitarian partners 
reported that access to Akobo West (especially the 
opposition-controlled areas) remained limited due to the 
volatile security situation, depriving hundreds of thousands 
of conflict-affected people of humanitarian assistance. In 
Canal/Pigi County, authorities also called for humanitarian 
support for IDP returnees in Atar,Wunekirr, Wunlueth, Mat, 
Khorwach and Allele 3 payams; exact figures are still being 
verified. Despite requests for support, ongoing clashes 
between government and opposition forces have made 
the area difficult for humanitarians to access. The security 
situation remains tense, with clashes leading to further 
displacement and possible civilian casualties in the area.
Fighting displaces civilians in Pochalla County, Greater Pibor 
Administrative Area
On 18 June, armed youth attacked a South Sudan People’s 
Defence Forces (SSPDF) position in Raat, Pochalla Payam, 
triggering clashes. The incident displaced hundreds of 
civilians, many of whom fled towards the border with 
Ethiopia and surrounding areas. The attack is likely to 
exacerbate tensions and insecurity in Raat town, a disputed 
area affected by ongoing competition over administrative 
control and access to gold mining resources.
Inter-agency assessment identifies critical humanitarian 
needs in Longochuk County, Upper Nile State
Preliminary findings from an Inter-Agency Rapid Needs 
Assessment (IRNA) conducted on 16 June indicate that 
an estimated 22,000 people in Udier Payam, Longochuk 
County, are in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. 
The most critical needs identified include food, WASH, 
nutrition, health and shelter. Nutrition screenings for 
children under five reveal high malnutrition levels, with a 
global acute malnutrition rate of above 40 per cent per 
cent, exceeding emergency thresholds. The nutrition 
facility in Udier is not functional due to a lack of supplies 
and access constraints. Community leaders reported 
that the last food distribution took place in December 
2025. The health facility is also non-functional owing to 
shortages of medical supplies. There are no functional 
Mothers register for non-food items, including mosquito nets and soap, outside the Outpatient 
Therapeutic Feeding Programme (OTP) in Dengjok Payam, Akobo County on 24 June 2026. 
Photo: ©OCHA/Doreen Kansiime
3
HUMANITARIAN UPDATE: As of 26 June 2026
boreholes or safe water sources, and the people are relying 
on unsafe water for domestic use. Many households lost 
shelters and non-food items (NFIs) during the conflict, 
with most people currently living in makeshift shelters. 
Women reported cases of gender-based violence (GBV), 
trauma and other protection concerns. However, there 
are no health or protection services available to support 
survivors. The Inter-Cluster Coordination Group (ICCG) in 
Malakal is mobilizing a response, contingent on access.
Continued influx from Sudan increases pressure in Renk 
County
Arrivals from Sudan into Renk County, Upper Nile State, 
continue, with over 4,400 new arrivals recorded between 1 
and 16 June, mainly through Joda/Wunthou. Movements 
are driven by ongoing conflict in Sudan’s Blue Nile State, 
with reports of increased casualties linked to intensified 
fighting. While no new war-wounded patients arrived 
between 12 and 19 June, the cumulative number stands at 
195, with a small number still receiving care. The continued 
influx has placed additional strain on health services, 
prompting plans to scale up staffing at Renk Civil Hospital. 
Nutrition screenings for children under age 5 at Renk 
Transit Centre reveal high malnutrition levels, with a global 
acute malnutrition rate of 17.3 per cent, above emergency 
thresholds. Screening and treatment services continue, 
alongside targeted supplementary feeding for children 
and pregnant and lactating women. Congestion remains a 
concern at the Transit Centre, with the current population 
of about 6,000 as of mid May, which has exceeded its 
3,000-person capacity. Authorities are expanding the Abu 
Khadra returnee site and have allocated land in Chemmedi 
Payam for refugee settlement to ease pressure and 
support onward relocation.
Government and UN reinforce commitment to durable 
solutions
On 16 June, the Government of South Sudan and the United 
Nations reaffirmed their commitment to advancing durable 
solutions during the second Steering Committee meeting 
in Juba, with a joint pledge to end protracted displacement 
for at least 60,000 people by the end of 2026. Progress 
under the 2024 National Durable Solutions Strategy was 
reviewed, highlighting that while returns and reintegration 
are advancing in some locations, outcomes remain 
dependent on access to basic services, land availability 
and local stability. State-level roadmaps have been rolled 
out in Upper Nile and Western Bahr el Ghazal, with plans 
underway for Unity State to strengthen coordinated 
humanitarian, development and peace interventions. 
To date, over 28,000 people have returned, reintegrated 
or resettled across the three states with support from 
the Government, United Nations agencies led by the 
International Organization for Migration (IOM), the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and UNHCR, 
and partners. This is alongside broader efforts supporting 
livelihoods and housing, land and property rights.
Humanitarian access impediments disrupt aid operations 
Humanitarian access remained constrained by violence 
against humanitarian personnel, assets and facilities, 
restriction of movement of agencies, personnel or goods, 
and interference in the implementation of humanitarian 
activities across the country. Humanitarian partners 
implementing multipurpose cash assistance are facing 
challenges with transporting cash from Juba to Akobo due 
to blockage by Military Intelligence at Juba International 
Airport. This blockage is affecting over 32,000 people 
registered to receive cash assistance in Akobo. 
In Ulang  County, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) 
operations were affected after the Ulang County 
Commissioner, in a letter dated 15 June to the State 
Governor, accused the organization of violating labour 
laws through recruitment practices, occupying a 
government school in Barmach without approval, and 
resuming activities in Barmach and Nyangore without 
informing county authorities. MSF on 15 June released 
a statement announcing the death of a staff member 
(a nurse) who worked at the Pieri Primary Health Care 
Centre (PHCC) project in Lankien. The staff member was 
confirmed killed on 28 May 2026 while travelling to Pieri. 
At least 24 aid workers, including contractors, have been 
killed since January. Humanitarian personnel, particularly 
national staff, continue to operate under extremely difficult 
conditions. Between January and May 2026, humanitarian 
partners reported 328 access incidents, representing a 74 
per cent increase compared with the same period in 2025.
Given persistent underreporting, the actual number is likely 
to be higher. The main constraints include conflictrelated 
disruptions, violence against humanitarian personnel 
and assets, interference with humanitarian activities and 
bureaucratic impediments. 
These challenges affect the speed, scale and cost of 
humanitarian operations, leaving vulnerable people 
exposed to greater risks. A humanitarian partner 
suspended operations in Mugwo Payam, Yei County, due 
to safety concerns after the abduction and detention of a 
female humanitarian worker, with perpetrators reportedly 
demanding a ransom of $20,000. This incident, coupled 
with repeated abductions of aid personnel along the Yei–
Morobo road, prompted Mugwo Development Organization 
(MDO) to suspend field missions on 11 June for monitoring 
food security and livelihoods activities and implementing 
capacity-building projects. In Malakal, Upper Nile State, 
authorities proposed new travel permit requirements for 
humanitarian missions, raising concerns over delays and 
restricted access to opposition-held areas with vulnerable 
populations. Access to Nasir, Ulang and nearby counties 
remains constrained by layered requirements, while 
ongoing interference continues to delay aid delivery.
Humanitarian access workshop held
4
HUMANITARIAN UPDATE: As of 26 June 2026
For further information, please contact: OCHA Public Information Officer
E-mail: doreen.kansiime@un.org
A stakeholder engagement workshop on humanitarian 
access and protection of civilians was held in Bor on 23 
and 24 June, calling for strengthened implementation 
of the 2017 Presidential Decree on free and unimpeded 
humanitarian access. The Governor of Jonglei State, 
Dr. Riek Gai Kok, acknowledged the critical role of 
humanitarian agencies in assisting vulnerable populations, 
while noting persistent operational challenges affecting 
the humanitarian response. OCHA facilitated sessions 
on humanitarian principles, humanitarian access and 
civilmilitary coordination. Participants included county 
commissioners, members of parliament, representatives 
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Jonglei Relief and 
Rehabilitation Commission (RRC), the Joint Border 
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM), SSPDF, 
and humanitarian partners.
Multiple public-health emergencies reported across South 
Sudan
South Sudan continues to face significant health needs 
driven by recurrent displacement, disease outbreaks, 
food insecurity and limited access to health care in 
hard-toreach areas. Priority needs include uninterrupted 
access to essential primary health care, maternal and 
child health services, emergency obstetric care, nutrition 
services, disease surveillance, and adequate medical 
supplies. The Health Cluster partners continue to support 
the Ministry of Health in coordinating and responding to 
multiple public health emergencies, including cholera, 
polio, mpox, acute food insecurity and cross-border 
Ebola readiness.
Ebola readiness
South Sudan remains at high risk of Ebola virus disease 
(EVD) importation from neighbouring countries. 
Although no cases have been confirmed, the risk 
remains high due to the porous borders and a strained 
health-care system. The national overall readiness 
score improved from 29 per cent to 45 per cent as of 
4 June. According to the World Health Organization 
(WHO), infection prevention and control stands at 8 
per cent, contact tracing at 14 per cent and surveillance 
at 33 per cent. Preparedness measures have been 
strengthened since the outbreak was reported At least 
284,733 travellers have been screened at Points of Entry 
(P o E) as of 26 June, up from 223,179 as of 22 June. 
Preparedness measures expanded geographically with 
the establishment of local Incident Management System 
(IMS) structures and Rapid Response Teams in Nimule, 
enhanced surveillance and contact-tracing capacity, 
and the deployment of additional personal protective 
equipment (PPE) kits for viral haemorrhagic fever 
response. A recent simulation exercise confirmed that 
national coordination mechanisms are functional but 
highlighted persistent gaps, including limited state-level 
IMS structures, shortages of PPE and laboratory reagents 
in some border areas, inadequate isolation infrastructure, 
and the absence of functional infectious waste disposal 
capacity. Key operational risks remain cross-border 
surveillance gaps with the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo (DRC), inconsistent pillar coordination meetings 
and unresolved waste management challenges. 
Immediate priorities include strengthening cross-border 
alert-sharing, operationalizing subnational response 
structures, accelerating approvals of standard operating 
procedures (SOPs) and improving supply chain 
coordination. The Ministry of Health has developed an 
updated EVD readiness and response plan for May to 
July, with an estimated cost of $7.3 million. The plan will 
be implemented through a coordinated, multi-partner 
and multisectoral approa
Cholera outbreak
The cholera outbreak remains active, with a total of 
107,224 cases and 1,699 deaths (case fatality rate: 1.6 
per cent) recorded across 55 counties in 9 states and 3 
administrative areas as of 22 June. In the past week (15 
to 21 June), 90 new cholera cases and no deaths were 
reported from 5 counties, a 34.3 per cent decrease from 
the previous week (137 cases). In Unity State, most cases 
were recorded at Bentiu IDP Camp, followed by Bentiu State 
Hospital and Yonyang. Children under age 5 accounted 
for 53 per cent of cases, with slightly more cases among 
females. Preparations for mop-up oral cholera vaccination 
(OCV) campaigns in Rubkona, Mayom and Leer counties 
of Unity State are underway, following the approval of 
435,477 oral cholera vaccine doses by the International 
Coordinating Group on Vaccine Provision during the week 
ending 19 June.
CERF allocates $6 million to strengthen Ebola preparedness amid 
A nutrition assistant at Medair’s Outpatient Therapeutic Programme (OTP) site in Akobo Town 
provides mothers with nutrition education to support the recovery of children with acute 
manutrition - 23 June 2026.
Photo: ©OCHA/Doreen Kansiime
5
HUMANITARIAN UPDATE: As of 26 June 2026
escalating humanitarian needs
Through the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF), the 
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Tom Fletcher, has allocated 
$6 million for Ebola operational readiness in South Sudan. 
South Sudan faces a high risk of the spread of Ebola, given 
active population movements across its borders with 
both DRC and Uganda. The Government of South Sudan, 
through the Ministry of Health, has activated the national 
preparedness and response plan to strengthen readiness 
for a potential importation of Ebola in 15 priority counties, 
although additional funding is required to sustain these 
measures. This allocation will strengthen preparedness 
to rapidly detect, investigate and contain imported Ebola 
virus disease while protecting health workers, maintaining 
essential health.