1 | P a g e 
 
Somalia Protection Cluster Newsletter | June 2026  
 
 
 
In June 2026, Somalia recorded 146,447 
internally displaced individuals  primarily due 
to conflict and insecurity (68%), followed by 
drought (28%) and other causes (3% ).1   During 
the same period, 2,138 individuals were 
reported to have been  exposed to protection 
risks, highlighting the continued scale and 
urgency of protection needs across the country. 
These findings underscore the critical need to 
sustain frontline protection monitoring, safe 
referrals, case management, and targeted 
assistance to reduce harm, prevent further 
vulnerability, and ensure timely, life -saving 
protection services for affected communities.  
El Niño Anticipatory Action: FAO’s Somalia 
Water and Land Information Management 
(SWALIM)2 indicate a high likelihood of El Niño 
conditions during the October –December 
(Deyr) 2026 season , increasing flood risks 
across parts of Somalia. The Protection Cluster 
is actively supporting the development of the 
Inter-Cluster Anticipatory Action Framework  
for drought and floods, ensuring protection 
priorities—including displacement, protection 
monitoring, early warning, referrals, and 
support for vulnerable groups —are integrated 
into preparedness efforts before anticipated 
climate shocks escalate into huma nitarian 
crises. 
 
1 PSMN: https://data.unhcr.org/en/dataviz/440?sv=0&geo=192  
2 https://www.fao.org/somalia/news/details/fao-warns-
somalia-to-prepare-now-for-potential-el-ni%C3%B1o-
linked-flooding-later-in-2026/en 
 
Between 18 June and 22 June 2026 , the 
Protection and Solutions Monitoring Network 
recorded the displacement of approximately 
3,500 households , (around 21,000 
individuals) across Galkayo district and cross-
border displacement of 1,230  due to severe 
drought and deteriorating living conditions. 
Protection risks affecting the displaced 
individuals include family separation,  
psychological and emotional distress, Gender 
Based Violence, loss of livelihoods  and 
productive assets, and inter -communication 
tensions due to competition over resources . 
Despite limited access to affected areas due to 
KEY FIGURES 
KEY HIGHLIGHTS 
Somalia  
Protection Cluster Newsletter 
June 2026
2 | P a g e 
 
Somalia Protection Cluster Newsletter | June 2026  
 
insecurity and resource constraints, the 
Protection Cluster is engaging partners and 
local authorities to mobilize response to 
affected populations. 
In June 2026, over 17,000 persons are affected 
by evictions  including in Kahda Garasbaaley 
and Daynile in Mogadishu, Bosasso, Baidoa and 
Kismayo, worsening existing humanitarian and 
protection concerns 3 . Most of these evictions 
were driven by agreement expiry, government-
led land repossession , ownership dispute, 
increase in rent , property sale  and policy 
change. Between January and June 2026, a total 
of 140,071 IDPs were displaced due to evictions, 
with April and May recording the highest 
monthly figures  while over 50,000 received 
prevention assistance . Humanitarian 
leadership and the government including the 
Commissioner of the Somalia Disaster 
Management Agency (SODMA) are engaging to 
address the recurrent evictions including an 
immediate eviction moratorium for internally 
displaced persons (IDPs).  
 
CORE FUNCTION 1: SUPPORT SERVICE 
DELIVERY 
Protection Programming Delivers 
Lifesaving Support to At -Risk 
Communities 
In June 2026, Protection partners assisted 
10,806 individuals with specialized protection 
services, demonstrating the continued 
relevance and lifesaving value of dedicated 
protection programming in Somalia. Through 
community-based protection, community self -
protection initiatives, psychosocial support, 
 
3 Evictions tracker https://somevictions.app.nrc.no/evictions  
individual protection assistance in cash and in-
kind, supported referrals, and protection case 
management, partners helped affected people 
reduce exposure to violence, coercion, 
exploitation, abuse, and deliberate detentions. 
These interventions addressed immediate 
protection risks while strengthening community 
resilience, improving access to essential 
services, and ensuring timely support for the 
most vulnerable. This highlights the need for 
sustained investment in specialized protection 
services as a core  part of the humanitarian 
response. The following partners provided 
protection interventions: 
Agency for Minority Rights & Development 
(AMARD)  
Target Locations: Baidoa District 
• Provided p sychological First Aid (PFA), 
individual counselling, group 
counselling, and community -based PSS 
activities to crisis -affected and 
vulnerable populations. A total of 167 
individuals received support aimed at 
improving emotional wellbeing, 
strengthening coping skills, and 
reducing psychosocial 
distress.Facilitated survivor-centred 
GBV case management services to 16 
survivors, including psychosocial 
support, safety planning, and referrals to 
specialized services. All cases were 
managed confidentially and in line with 
GBV guiding principles to ensure safe 
and timely access to support. 
 
Dignilty First Somalia (DFS)  
• DFS implemented community -led flood 
mitigation works, including embankment 
reinforcement, drainage clearance, and 
erosion-control measures in six high-risk 
locations across Somalia benefiting 500 
farming households. The activities were 
carried out with technical supervision 
and community participation to protect 
productive assets and access routes and 
CLUSTER CORE 
FUNCTIONS
3 | P a g e 
 
Somalia Protection Cluster Newsletter | June 2026  
 
mitigate the protection risks associated 
with floods or El Nino. 
• Survivor-Centred GBV Case 
Management, CMR Referrals and cash 
protection: DFS provided confidential 
case management, psychosocial 
support, safety planning, CMR services 
and referrals for 50 women and girls at 
risk of or affected by GBV  in Xudur 
district. Eligible survivors also received 
cash for protection assistance to 
address immediate protection risks and 
support their recovery. 
• Provided dignity kits to 425 vulnerable 
women and girls while mobile outreach 
teams provided GBV prevention, PSS, 
referral pathway, and PSEA awareness 
sessions to 467 in Xudur district . The 
activity also strengthened access to 
complaints and feedback mechanisms 
through community -based information 
sharing. 
 
Somali Awareness and Social Development 
Organization (SASDO) 
Target Locations: Afgoye, Awdhegle, Qoryoley, 
Deynile, Kahda and Garasbaley districts 
• SASDO provided psychosocial support 
services, including counselling, 
psychosocial first aid, and group support 
sessions, to IDPs, returnees, and 
vulnerable host community members. A 
total of 750 individuals received 
confidential and survivor -centred 
support to improve their wellbeing and 
resilience. Strengthened referral 
pathways by identifying vulnerable 
individuals and connecting them with 
specialized protection and support 
services. Through referrals and case 
follow-up, 575 individuals gained access 
to c oordinated and survivor -centred 
assistance while ensuring confidentiality 
and dignity. 
• SASDO provided legal awareness, 
counselling, and referral services to 
individuals facing protection and legal 
challenges, including civil 
documentation, housing, land and 
property (HLP) issues, and family 
disputes. Individuals requiring legal 
assistance were referred to appropriate 
legal aid services for further support.  
Community Empowerment & Social 
Development Organization (CESDO) 
• CESDO delivered specialized protection 
services through four static and mobile 
Protection Desks in Baidoa rural villages, 
providing case management , 
psychosocial support, counselling, 
information, and referrals to 226 
individuals (65 men, 154 women, 3 boys, 
and 4 girls) facing diverse protection 
risks, including persons with disabilities, 
GBV survivors, elderly persons, minority 
groups, economically vulnerable  
individuals and those with health and 
nutrition risks. These interventions 
supported individuals in addressing 
urgent and life -threatening protection 
risks and needs across Baidoa rural 
villages. 
• With funding from the Somalia 
Humanitarian Fund (SHF), CESDO 
provided disability -specific protection 
services to 426 persons with 
Figure 1:Community members receiving legal awareness and 
counceling @SASDO
4 | P a g e 
 
Somalia Protection Cluster Newsletter | June 2026  
 
disabilities (213 men, 108 boys, 55 
women, and 50 girls) in Baidoa rural 
villages through the distribution of 
assistive devices, including wheelchairs, 
crutches, walking and white canes, 
hearing aids, and prescription 
eyeglasses in collaboration with a 
specialist agency - Al Kheyrad centre - in 
Baidoa to facilitate the interventions. The 
intervention enhanced safe mobility, 
dignity, access to essential services, and 
reduced protection risks for persons with 
physical, hearing, and visual 
impairments. 
• On 24 June 2026, the Ministry of Internal 
Security (MoIS), in collaboration with the 
Somali Explosive Management Authority 
(SEMA) and UNMAS, convened 
Somalia’s first High -Level Mine Action 
Coordination Meeting in Mogadishu. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: community consultations at the protection desk in 
Ismoodnoy rural village, Baidoa @CESDO 
The meeting brought together 
government and humanitarian 
stakeholders to strengthen national 
coordination on mine action following 
Somalia’s submission of its Article 5 
Extension Request under the Anti -
Personnel Mine Ban Convention 
(APMBC). Participants agreed on key 
priorities, including enhancing 
coordination, advancing the SEMA Mine 
Action Bill, addressing operational 
challenges, and mobilizing donor 
support, reaffirming their commitment 
to a safer, explosive hazard-free Somalia. 
• Strengthening responsible Information 
Sharing for Protection -Sensitive Mine 
Action Data, iMMAP supported the 
Somalia Explosive Management 
Authority (SEMA)  in advancing the draft 
Information and Communications 
Sharing Policy to strengthen information 
governance and the safe handling of 
mine action data. The initiative focuses 
on establishing clear procedures for 
sharing sensitive information related to 
explosive ordnance incidents, casualties, 
affected locations, and operational 
activities. By promoting responsible 
data-sharing practices and stronger 
safeguards, the activity enhances 
coordination, evidence-based advocacy, 
and decision -making among SEMA, the 
Protection Cluster, and Mine Action 
partners. 
Accelerating Action to End FGM in 
Somalia:  
• UNICEF and UNFPA, together with the 
Ministry of Family and Human Rights 
Development, convened key 
stakeholders to identify practical actions 
to accelerate the abandonment of FGM 
in Somalia. Discussions emphasized 
strengthening community and religious 
engagement, promoting health sector 
leadership to prevent FGM 
medicalization, advancing legal and 
locally led solutions to protect the rights 
and wellbeing of girls and supporting 
health professionals as trusted 
advocates for prevention and
5 | P a g e 
 
Somalia Protection Cluster Newsletter | June 2026  
 
abandonment. The initiative was 
supported by the Government of 
Denmark. 
 
Strengthening Child Protection 
Case Management Systems:  
• The Child Protection Technical Working 
Group conducted CPIMS+ and case 
management training in Puntland and 
Galmudug, strengthening the capacity of 
55 child protection practitioners  to 
deliver quality, confidential, and timely 
services for vulnerable children, 
particularly those affected by drought. 
The initiative enhanced case 
management, information management, 
coordination, and evidence -based 
responses through the support of SOS 
Children’s Villages, Save the Children, 
UNICEF , reflecting a shared 
commitment to strengthening child 
protection systems and improving 
outcomes for children across Somalia. 
 
 
Figure 3 2:CPIMS+ and case management training facilitated in 
Dhusamareb, Somalia. 
 
CORE FUNCTION 5: CAPACITY 
BUILDING  
GIS Mentorship and Capacity 
Development for Explosive Ordnance 
(EO) Risk Analysis  
iMMAP completed the GIS Mentorship and 
Capacity Development Report and provided 
technical support to strengthen SEMA’s GIS and 
information management capabilities. The 
mentorship improved skills in mapping 
explosive ordnance contamination, accident 
locations, Explosive Ordnance Risk Education 
(EORE) coverage,  and operational gaps. 
Enhanced GIS  capacity supports the 
identification of high-risk areas, informed priori  
tisation of mine action interventions, and more 
evidence-based protection planning for 
communities affected by explosive ordnance. 
 
iMMAP continued work on SEMA's official 
website, Power BI dashboards and the 
Knowledge Management and MEAL Needs 
Assessment. These products are intended to 
improve how mine action information is 
organised, visualised and communicated. The 
dashboards are expected to support analysis of 
operational trends, risk patterns and service 
gaps, while the website can help increase 
public access to non -sensitive information 
about SEMA's mandate and mine action 
priorities. Once sufficiently developed, relevant 
dashboard outputs may be shared with the 
Protection Cluster to strengthen joint analysis, 
advocacy and evidence -based response 
planning.
6 | P a g e 
 
Somalia Protection Cluster Newsletter | June 2026  
 
CORE FUNCTION 6: SUPPORT ROBUST 
ADVOCACY 
Diminished Protection Cluster 
Partners’ Capacity 
Funding cuts and pre-existing funding shortfalls 
are forcing partners to scale down or suspend 
specialized protection services, weakening the 
Cluster’s ability to reach the 1.9 million people  
targeted under the 2026 HNRP and increasing 
exposure to violence, exploitation, family 
separation, and denial of rights . Vulnerable 
groups women, children, persons with 
disabilities, older persons, internally displaced 
persons (IDPs), female and child headed 
households, survivors of Gender Based 
Violence and vulnerable communities exposed 
to protection risks —are experiencing delays in 
accessing critical protection services. Reduced 
operational presence and information flows are 
also limiting the ability of humanitarian actors to 
identify high -risk areas, prioritize needs, and 
coordinate timely, evidence-based responses.  
The Global Protection Cluster published 
capacity mapping report : Protection 
Capacities Under Pressure: Evidence from 
Consultations with Protection Partners 
 
4 Protection Capacities Under Pressure: Evidence from 
Consultations with Protection Partners across 22 
Operations 
across 22 Operations  including Somal ia to 
better understand how recent funding 
reductions are affecting protection partners’ 
operational capacities, staffing, and ability to 
deliver critical protection services4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Somalia Protection Cluster 
 Contact: sommopcc@unhcr.org 
Figure 4: Somalia Mine Action dashboard using IMSMA-related 
operational reporting and partner submissions covering 2004-2026 
@ iMAPP