Starmer says UK must boost defence investment over threat of Russia
Commenting further on the defence investment plan, Starmer highlighted the urgency of boosting defence due to the threat of a Russian attack against Nato.
He said:


double quotation mark
If you needed any reminder about the importance of this, it is our intelligence assessment, and the assessment of other countries in Nato, 
that there could be an attack by Russia on Nato as soon as 2030.


So you can see the urgency and the priority that we’re putting behind this.


That defence investment plan will be really important, it will be very much focused on the capability of the future that we need to defend our country.


It will mean more work for you and other people like you around the country, because I’m really determined that as we increase defence spend, which we’ve already done, as we implement the defence investment plan, 
which will be published in coming weeks,
 it’s really important that what goes alongside that is good, well-paid, skilled jobs in this country.


Share
Updated at 
06.27 EDT
Key events
UK in the “most dangerous period” in decades, says military chief
Earlier, Air Chief Marshal 
Richard Knighton
, the UK’s chief of the defence staff, warned 
now is the “most dangerous period” in decades for Britain
 and the country needs to prepare for potential “longer conflicts”.
Knighton said 
Russia was “probing, challenging, testing our defences”
 including through “cyber-attacks or trying to smuggle technology, and reckless sabotage and assassination attempts”.
“This is the most dangerous time I have known in my working life,”
 he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme.
“And it is important that society and all of us recognise and understand that, and that may mean that we need to make different choices and different priorities.”
Prime minister Keir Starmer speaks with Air Chief Marshal Richard Knighton during a visit to a defence contractor in Bedfordshire in May 2025.
 Photograph: Henry Nicholls/Reuters
A former chair of an influential parliamentary committee said it was “shocking” that the public spending watchdog had not established Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor’s income from subletting properties.
Margaret Hodge, who led the public accounts committee, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme she was “very concerned” that the National Audit Office (NAO) was not able to find out how much money the former prince had made from letting properties.
Hodge said she was concerned the National Audit Office was not able to find how much money Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor was making from subletting properties on the crown estate.
 Photograph: Getty Images
She also raised concerns that a report by the NAO did not cover all of the crown estate properties.
Hodge made her comments after the NAO revealed Mountbatten-Windsor received private income from subletting three cottages on his Windsor Royal Lodge estate while paying a “peppercorn rent” to the crown estate.
“We all want a royal family to be continued to be respected, valued and treasured. I want a royal family, but in a modern era that does require proper transparency and accountability. It’s shocking that the National Audit Office was not able to establish how much money Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor secured from the properties he let,” the Labour peer, who was chair of the committee from 2010 to 2015, said.
Read more:
Starmer says UK must boost defence investment over threat of Russia
Commenting further on the defence investment plan, Starmer highlighted the urgency of boosting defence due to the threat of a Russian attack against Nato.
He said:


double quotation mark
If you needed any reminder about the importance of this, it is our intelligence assessment, and the assessment of other countries in Nato, 
that there could be an attack by Russia on Nato as soon as 2030.


So you can see the urgency and the priority that we’re putting behind this.


That defence investment plan will be really important, it will be very much focused on the capability of the future that we need to defend our country.


It will mean more work for you and other people like you around the country, because I’m really determined that as we increase defence spend, which we’ve already done, as we implement the defence investment plan, 
which will be published in coming weeks,
 it’s really important that what goes alongside that is good, well-paid, skilled jobs in this country.


Share
Updated at 
06.27 EDT
Speaking during a visit to a defence factory, Starmer said:


double quotation mark
We’ve been working on that defence investment plan for some time, very closely with our armed forces, as you would expect, because we need that interaction.


What is the capability that you most need, in what time period, with the MoD and actually across government, because this is a cross-government priority.


And that will now be published before the Nato summit,
 which is in just a few weeks’ time, a very important summit where countries across the world come together.


Nato, of course, being the single most effective military alliance the world has ever seen.


Prime minister Keir Starmer during a visit to Stark, a defence tech company in Swindon.
 Photograph: Alastair Grant/PA
Share
Updated at 
06.41 EDT
Starmer says delayed defence investment plan will be published 'in the coming weeks'
The prime minister is speaking about defence during a visit to Wiltshire.
He said the long-delayed 
defence investment plan “will now be published before the Nato summit” on 7 July.
 He added that it will be published 
“in the coming weeks”.
Originally expected last autumn, the defence investment plan has faced repeated postponements amid warnings that the military faces a £28bn funding gap over the next four years.
Prime minister Keir Starmer looks at a Varta system as he visits Stark, a defence tech company in Swindon.
 Photograph: Alastair Grant/AP
Share
Updated at 
06.43 EDT
Andy Burnham has signalled he would begin transforming England’s broken social care system this year if he became prime minister, accusing Westminster of “flinching away” from tackling difficult policy problems.
The Greater Manchester mayor said politicians must be willing to take on “the weight of the system” that stood in the way of radical change, as he began to set out his prospectus for government if he won the 
Makerfield byelection
.
Andy Burnham's bid to change Westminster | Politics Weekly
Burnham, who first tried to change the social care system when he was Labour’s health secretary in 2009, said there was an urgent need to fix the crisis. Then, he had planned a levy on estates to pay for universal social care, while in recent years he has talked about replacing inheritance tax with a progressive “care levy” to fund a national care service.
“It is urgent, the need to fix social care, and I personally would look at all of the kind of implications of that in relation to inheritance tax and care charges and everything. I wouldn’t flinch from it,” he said.
Read more:
UK asylum system on the brink of collapse, report warns
In other developments this morning, 
a committee of cross-party MPs has warned
 
the UK asylum system is on the brink of collapse
 as the government fails to cope with severe pressure.
In a report published today, the public accounts committee said the Home Office has focused on short-term fixes and was “at considerable risk of repeating past failures”.
Geoffrey Clifton-Brown, chair of the committee, said:


double quotation mark
Our report provides an end-to-end snapshot of the entire asylum system, 
and its findings paint a disturbing picture
 – at the time of our inquiry, control of it had been all but lost.


The focus on short term, reactive ‘fixes’ has left the government chasing after pressures pushed from one part of the system to the next.


There is no clear strategy
 uniting these efforts, and engagement across departments and with local authorities is patchy at best.


Given senior officials’ inability to articulate what the asylum system is collectively trying to achieve, it is no wonder such a directionless bureaucracy ends with people at the heart of it either left in limbo, or lost entirely.


The Home Office announced a series of reforms to asylum and refugee policy
, including plans for people granted asylum in the UK having their refugee status made temporary and subject to review every 30 months.
Conservative MP Harriet Cross
 also commented on claims from the Trump administration of “two-tier policing” in the UK.
Speaking to Sky News, she said: 
“I think it’s clearly not helpful
 when we’ve got enough people within the UK itself concerned about this for other voices to add.
“But certainly … the point is that 
there is concern within the UK of how policing is at the moment,
 and what we really need is a return to common sense policing and for everyone to have equality under the law. And for whatever reason we have slipped away from that.”
Share
Updated at 
04.40 EDT
Also commenting on the US state department’s statement on Nowak’s murder was 
Liberal Democrat MP Calum Miller.
He suggested the prime minister 
should summon the US ambassador over the matter.
“The three main parliamentary party leaders were right to call for calm, respect and unity yesterday,” said Miller, who is the Lib Dems’ foreign affairs spokesperson.
“The Trump administration 
should not be using the tragic murder of Henry Nowak as a political football.
“This is flagrant foreign interference that seeks to fan the flames of division
 and the prime minister should summon the US ambassador immediately.”
Lammy rejects US state department criticism of 'two-tier policing' in UK
We have more comments from 
David Lammy,
 who was on the media round this morning.
He 
rejected the US state department’s criticism of “two-tiered policing” in the UK
 in relation to the 
murder of 18-year-old student Henry Nowak.
The US state department weighed in after 
Vickrum Digwa, 23, was jailed for 21 years this week for killing Nowak
 in Southampton in December. Digwa stabbed Nowak five times with a Sikh ceremonial knife before telling police that Nowak had been racist towards him, causing officers to arrest and handcuff the student before they saw his fatal injuries.
In a post on X, the US state department expressed their condolences to Nowak’s family, but added: “Ideological conditioning and two-tiered policing are glaring symptoms of civilisational decline.” (Read more on this story 
here
).
When asked to comment, Lammy told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: 
“I don’t recognise this caricature of a two-tier policing system in our country.
“I just don’t see it in the interactions I have with policing, 
and so I do reject that.”
Lammy said it was “good” that police chiefs are looking at the wording of anti-racism guidance as the “public need clarity in these circumstances”.
“And it sounds like there’s not clarity fully in this area,” he added.
Opening summary: Lammy comes out in defence of Starmer after Burnham confirms leadership ambitions
Hello and welcome to our UK politics blog.
David Lammy 
has come out in support of the prime minister, saying 
Keir Starmer
 
would fight in a leadership contest after Andy
 
Burnham said he would join one if elected an MP.
“There is no contest at the moment, and my view is it would be 
a huge distraction at this time,”
 the deputy prime minister told LBC this morning.
“The prime minister, by the way, has been absolutely clear: 
if there is a contest, he’ll be
 
in it.”
He added: “I’ve supported every leader of the Labour party. They’ve had my full loyalty. 
Keir Starmer has got my loyalty,
 full loyalty, until the day he no longer wishes to serve.”
His remarks came after the Greater Manchester mayor 
announced he would challenge the prime minister should there be a leadership race.
 It was the first time Burnham, who is standing in the Makerfield byelection, has publicly said he would consider launching a bid to become the Labour leader.
Andy Burnham on BBC’s Question Time.
 Photograph: BBC Question Time/Reuters
Appearing on Question Time last night, he said: “I think Wes Streeting seems to have launched a leadership contest, 
so if that is running, I would seek to join it.
 But I’d have to persuade members of the Parliamentary Labour Party to do the same.”
Hitting back at Burnham, Downing Street issued statement saying
 Starmer “will not walk away”
, adding: “The country expects us to focus on governing and to deliver change for hard-working people, 
not get distracted by Westminster debates.”
In an interview with the Guardian’s political editor 
Pippa Crerar, 
Burnham signalled he would begin transforming England’s broken social care system this year if he became prime minister.
“It is urgent, the need to fix social care, and I personally would look at all of the kind of implications of that in relation to inheritance tax and care charges and everything. I wouldn’t flinch from it,” he said.
Read more here:
Also today, 
Lammy said tech billionaire Elon Musk should “step back” from tweeting about the 
murder of Henry Nowak
 
amid an 
ongoing feud between the government and X owner.
“I think there’s an IPO this week in the States on Starlink. Elon Musk should get on with that,” Lammy told Sky News.
“I mean, tweeting over 100 times about this tragic, horrific case … I urge Elon Musk to stay out of tweeting about this sensitive case.”
He added: “I don’t spend time on X surfing Elon Musk tweets, so I haven’t read them, but I’m not sure any of them reached the standard that require that. But I think it is appropriate for politicians 
to urge Elon Musk to step back.”
Starmer has accused Musk of “interfering in our politics” and attempting to create division
 with the numerous social media posts he has made about the murder of Nowak, many of which have used far-right themes and talking points.
Share
Updated at 
04.02 EDT