High fuel prices and restrictions intended to curb Ebola will affect food access 
Key Messages 
Uganda - Key Message Update May - September 2026 
In May, poor households in Karamoja and refugees — primarily from South Sudan and the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo (DRC) — remain populations of highest concern for acute food insecurity. FEWS 
NET estimates 1.0 to 2.49 million people to be experiencing Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes or worse. Needs 
are likely to peak in May (the height of the lean season) ahead of the first season harvests in June. Refugees’ 
food access remains restricted by minimal access to land for own production, particularly in West Nile, and high 
competition for income-generating opportunities. In Karamoja, food access remains limited by chronic poverty, 
which far exceeds levels in the rest of the country due to the semi-arid region’s limited crop production 
potential and herd sizes diminished by years of cattle rustling.  
The March-May rains have overall supported near-average greenness and vegetation health across 
most of the country, despite spatiotemporal anomalies in rainfall distribution. Onset occurred atypically 
early, in February rather than March, with above-average rainfall through the end of March; however, a notable 
dry spell occurred in early to mid-April, when rainfall usually peaks. The dry spell disrupted agricultural 
production, delaying planting in some areas and wilting crops countrywide early in the season. Rainfall in April 
was insufficient for planting in parts of both unimodal and bimodal zones; as a result, many crops suffered 
stunted growth, forcing farmers to pivot to late-season planting and irrigation strategies. May rainfall was near 
average in most areas and sufficient for early growth and crop recovery for households whose planting cycles 
had been disrupted, supporting near-average conditions in most areas for this time in the season.  
In May, the World Health Organization recognized an Ebola outbreak in Ituri Province, DRC. In response, 
Uganda closed its border with the DRC (with exceptions for healthcare efforts and formal cargo trade) 
and implemented precautions, including temporary market suspensions in border districts. Negative 
impacts on food access for households along the border are expected: market closures and disrupted trade and 
agricultural labor supply from the DRC are affecting harvesting and post-harvest processing, and forcing people 
to travel further to access markets. Poor households, who depend heavily on markets for food purchases, will 
be worst affected. Uganda has experience managing Ebola outbreaks and retains a relatively robust monitoring 
capacity and generally high public trust in health officials. In the DRC, many factors make virus containment 
extremely challenging: the scale of the outbreak (already the third largest on record), poor monitoring 
capacity, insufficient medical facilities and equipment, distrust of healthcare workers, and traditional burial 
practices involving contact with the deceased who remain contagious. The outbreak is expected to continue for 
the foreseeable future in DRC, and cases will continue to spill over into Uganda, necessitating prolonged 
implementation of precautions. 
In bimodal areas (central, southern, and western regions, plus parts of the north and eastern Uganda), 
improvements in food availability from green harvests are beginning and expected to continue through 
June-July, driven by anticipated near-average harvests. Harvests are expected to be near average in most 
areas, except in some western and central regions (particularly areas around Lake Victoria, which received 
below-average rainfall in April-May that is expected to drive localized below-average yields). However, the flow 
of these supplies to some market areas near the DRC border is likely to be disrupted by the ongoing 
precautionary measures for Ebola containment.  
In Karamoja (the unimodal semi-arid region in the northeast), the lean season is nearing its end. 
Improved food access is expected through September (the end of the rainy season), driven by seasonal 
increases in pasture and water availability. Rainfall was average to above average from February to May, but 
FEWS NET is a United States Government-funded activity. The content of this report does not
necessarily reflect the view of the United States Government.
FEWS NET Uganda
uganda@fews.net
fews.net/east-africa/uganda
Recommended citation: FEWS NET. Uganda Key Message Update May - September 2026: High fuel prices and restrictions 
intended to curb Ebola will affect food access, 2026. 
Key Message Update 
This Key Message Update provides a high-level analysis of current acute food insecurity conditions and any changes to FEWS NET's latest projection of acute food insecurity outcomes 
in the specified geography. Learn more here. 
below-average rainfall is expected from June through September. Most farmers planted staple crops late 
(sorghum, maize, and beans), while others replanted due to the prolonged April dry spell. These delays will likely 
push the harvest into September and October, compared to the typical July-August period, with below-average 
harvests for replanted crops. Above-average pasture conditions and water availability, combined with ongoing 
vaccination initiatives, have improved livestock conditions and increased milk availability. Livestock prices 
remain above average for this point in the lean season due to good body conditions and restocking programs, 
which have created local demand. 
The refugee and asylum seeker population surpassed 2 million in April, amid already strained support 
systems, and remains the largest refugee population of any African country. The majority have come from 
South Sudan (52 percent), with around 33 percent from the DRC, 5 percent from Sudan, and 10 percent from 
other countries. Food access for refugee households is severely strained due to a combination of limited access 
to land and agricultural inputs, which restrict capacity for own food production, in conjunction with reduced 
income‑earning opportunities that constrain economic access to food purchases. In response to UN appeals, 
the US recently announced a 1.8 billion USD grant for humanitarian assistance worldwide, of which around 75 
million is expected to be allocated to Uganda to support life-saving assistance to refugees and their host 
communities, as well as severe acute malnutrition caused by drought and a measles outbreak. 
Fuel costs were relatively stable in May following an initial 10 percent increase in April, but did start to 
increase toward the end of the month with the transition to newly imported fuel purchased at higher 
rates. Government fuel procurement policy and intervention have helped to quell fuel price speculation. The 
high cost of fuel is expected to continue driving above-average transport costs through at least September, 
leading to increases in the prices of other goods and services.  
In May, food prices remained generally below long-term averages. Pass through of increasing fuel costs 
to food prices is not noticeable to date, but likely to begin manifesting in June. Global oil price fluctuations 
and exchange rate depreciation continue to drive up costs in other sectors of the economy. Ugandans’ food 
access has been partially insulated from the global rise in transportation costs because Uganda is a net food 
exporter, most Ugandans consume locally own-produced staple foods, and fuel remains slightly cheaper in 
Uganda compared to other countries in the region. Nonetheless, the impact of imported fuel price shocks on 
food prices is expected to rise as long as the Strait of Hormuz remains closed and shocks to the global fuel 
supply compound. 
* FEWS NET classification is IPC-compatible with limited exceptions. IPC-compatible analysis follows key IPC protocols but does not necessarily reflect the consensus of national food security 
partners. As of IPC 3.0, the IPC no longer assesses the impact of food assistance on classification and thus no longer maps the (!). However, FEWS NET continues to produce food security 
maps inclusive of the (!) as well as maps compatible with IPC 3.0/3.1, which include the mapping of food security assistance bags. In rare cases, FEWS NET classification is IPC-aligned but 
not IPC-compatible. IPC-aligned analysis is evidence-based but some types of evidence required for IPC-compatibility were not available. 
Key Message Update May - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 2