Concept of Operations, June 2026 
Sudan   
 
 
This Concept of Operations is a live document, and the activities will be adapted and revised as the situation unfolds and further 
assessment results become available, including the possible provision of additional logistics common services as required by the 
humanitarian community.  
Background 
 
Since the outbreak of conflict between the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and the Rapid Support Forces  (RSF) in April 
2023, Sudan has faced one of the world’s largest humanitarian crises. Nearly 8.9 million people are internally displaced – 
including more than 6.6 million displaced since the conflict began . This represents a 23 percent decrease from the peak 
of almost 11.6 million recorded in January 2025, reflecting increased returns, particularly to Khartoum and A l Jazirah. 
Nearly 4.6 million people have fled to neighbouring countries. The crisis has also exacerbated the humanitarian situation 
in Chad and South Sudan, both of which were already dealing with protracted emergencies.  
 
In 2026, 33.7 million people in Sudan require humanitarian assistance – an increase of 3.3 million from 2025 . Despite 
these overwhelming needs, access constraints, bureaucratic and administrative impediments, an overstretched logistics 
market, storage constraints,  and rising costs for logistics services  continue to hinder the delivery of humanitarian 
assistance to affected populations . Crossline and cross -border movement of humanitarian personnel and supplies 
continue to face significant obstacles.   
 
To address these logistical challenges and mitigate disruptions to the humanitarian supply chain, the Logistics Cluster has 
been scaling up its operations since 2023 (following its initial activation in 2020). With the main operational cell based in 
Port Sudan, the  Logistics Cluster leads coordination, advocates for the uninterrupted flow of assistance, and supports 
humanitarian partners operating across the country. 
 
Operational Constraints 
 
Humanitarian organizations are facing significant operational challenges due to factors including movement restrictions, 
airspace closures, limited safe access to conflict -affected areas, complex deconfliction processes, bureaucratic 
impediments, and telecommunications constraints, among others. These issues are significantly hindering the delivery of 
assistance to affected populations.  
Partners have reported the following logistics gaps and bottlenecks impacting their operations , including through the  
Gaps and Needs Analysis (GNA) published in August 2025: 
• Limited humanitarian access to hard-to-reach areas, particularly in Darfur and Kordofan regions. 
• Limited operational points of entry into Sudan and restrictions on crossline movements due to ongoing conflict and 
insecurity. 
• Limited ability to contract reliable transportation and storage services due to security constraints, an overstretched 
market, rising costs, and service disruptions. 
• Insufficient temperature-controlled storage and transport capacity, particularly for cross-border corridors. 
• Limited information on logistics service providers’ availability and capacity, market conditions, and road network and 
infrastructure status, particularly during the rainy season.
Concept of Operations, June 2026 
Sudan   
 
 
This Concept of Operations is a live document, and the activities will be adapted and revised as the situation unfolds and further 
assessment results become available, including the possible provision of additional logistics common services as required by the 
humanitarian community.  
• Bureaucratic and administrative impediments, including lengthy and frequently changing customs and importation 
procedures and travel permit approval delays. 
• Airspace closure except for limited air access in Port Sudan, Khartoum, Kassala, and Dongola. 
• Limited fuel availability and rising costs in certain areas. 
 
Points of Entry 
Air: Port Sudan International Airport is the only international airport open and operational for both humanitarian and 
commercial flights. UNHAS is currently providing humanitarian flights from Nairobi, Kenya , and Jeddah, Saudi Arabia to 
Port Sudan. From Port Sudan, UNHAS operates flights to Khartoum, Kassala and Dongola. UNHAS also operates flights to 
several locations in Chad, including Farchana, Abeche, Guereda, and Adre, among others. The expansion of air services 
to additional locations across Sudan remains dependent on access and security conditions, and the issuance of clearances 
from the relevant authorities . The latest UNHAS flight schedules are regularly published on the Sudan Logistics Cluster 
website.  
 
Road: The following road entry points are officially authorised for use by the GoS:  
• Adre, Chad: Considered the most operationally relevant due to its location in relation to target areas  in Darfur. 
• Tine/Tina, Chad: Partners have reported significant bureaucratic and administrative impediments when trying to 
cross through this point. 
• Renk/Rabak, South Sudan: Partners have reported bureaucratic impediments when trying to use this entry point.  
• Argeen, Egypt: Partners are increasingly using this border crossing to reach the Darfur and Kordofan regions. While 
generally viable, p artners have reported c ongestion, limited infrastructure , and clearance delays  at the border  
crossing. After entering Sudan, cargo usually transits via Dongola or Al Dabbah in Northern State.  
• Kurmuk; Yabus; and Galabat/Metema, Ethiopia: Partners have experienced complex and lengthy customs processes 
at these entry points. 
 
Eritrea and Central African Republic are not currently under consideration as transport corridors due to their complex 
operating environments; and routes from Libya are not being considered due to insecurity.  
 
Sea: The Port Sudan seaport is operational. 
 
Transportation 
Crossline road transportation from Port Sudan to southern and western areas of the country is challenging due to  
bureaucratic impediments, insecurity, and damage to infrastructure. While there is sufficient availability of commercial 
transporters, partners report significantly elevated  prices mainly due to the heightened security constraints along 
transport routes and the high cost of fuel. Transporters may be reluctant to operate in conflict-affected areas given the 
high level of risks. Due to these constraints, partners are working with transporters to assess the feasibility of alternative 
routes.
Concept of Operations, June 2026 
Sudan   
 
 
This Concept of Operations is a live document, and the activities will be adapted and revised as the situation unfolds and further 
assessment results become available, including the possible provision of additional logistics common services as required by the 
humanitarian community.  
The Logistics Cluster has supported the operational planning and coordination of humanitarian road convoys. However, 
these movements have faced challenges, as partners often receive permits at different times  – or, in some cases, are 
denied permits altogether . Staff movement restrictions and telecommunications network outages have impacted the 
ability of partners to gather information on road conditions which are heavily impacted during the rainy season. Partners 
have reported that transporters have limited capacity to meet cold -chain and temperature -controlled transportation 
needs, especially from Chad. 
 
Storage 
There is limited storage capacity (including temperature-controlled storage) in many locations across Sudan, particularly 
around border regions. Establishing and maintaining warehouses remains a challenge for both the Logistics Cluster and 
partners due to the ongoing conflict. Many partners have reported damage to and looting of their facilities.  
 
Fuel 
Fuel is primarily imported, making the market vulnerable to external shocks and price volatility. Fuel prices increased 
sharply in April 2026, particularly for diesel, driven by external market disruptions  and currency depreciation, impacting 
humanitarian operations. This upward trend is expected to continue due to these factors, as well as anticipated increased 
demand during the upcoming summer period. WFP provides fuel to partners through On-Demand Services (ODS)  on a 
cost-recovery basis through Service Level Agreements (SLAs) in various locations across Sudan, as well as in Chad. 
  
Customs 
Partners have reported significant bureaucratic impediments to the clearance of humanitarian commodities, especially 
medical supplies.  
 
Telecommunications Challenges 
Damage to telecommunications infrastructure  due to the ongoing conflict has degraded service availabilit y and further 
strained the already deteriorated national power grid.  The Emergency Telecommunications Cluster (ETC)  currently 
provides internet connectivity services in seven locations and plans to expand connectivity to locations to the Darfur and 
Kordofan regions , access and security permitting . Limited connectivity  in hard-to-reach locations  significantly impacts 
response efforts, particularly in the Darfur and Kordofan regions, affecting the availability of cash and fuel, and the ability 
of partners to gather key logistics information. The lack of telecommunications services in certain areas  impedes access 
negotiations that enable logistics operations, which rely on the ability to contact key actors along the transport routes. 
 
Objectives and Planned Activities 
 
Based on the current operational constraints and lo gistics gaps, and in line with the 2026 Humanitarian Response Plan , 
the Sudan Logistics Cluster aims to facilitate coordination and access to key logistics-related information, and to provide 
common logistics services as a provider of last resort (PoLR) to enable a timely and uninterrupted supply of life -saving 
relief items to affected populations in Sudan. This Concept of Operations aims to deliver on the following objectives:
Concept of Operations, June 2026 
Sudan   
 
 
This Concept of Operations is a live document, and the activities will be adapted and revised as the situation unfolds and further 
assessment results become available, including the possible provision of additional logistics common services as required by the 
humanitarian community.  
1. Coordination and Information Management : The Logistics Cluster will l everage the logistics knowledge and 
expertise of responding humanitarian organisations to jointly evaluate the operational situation and support a 
coordinated humanitarian logistics response. It will collect, analyse, and shar e relevant logistics information to 
ensure continuity of operations, monitor evolving support needs, a nd identify gaps and bottlenecks in the 
humanitarian community’s operational capabilities. Where possible – and in line with its mandate and available 
funding – the Logistics Cluster will work to address these challenges. Additionally,  it will support cross -border 
monitoring arrangements for United Nations (UN) humanitarian consignments crossing from Chad into Sudan via the 
Adre border crossing , contributing to transparent cross -border operations. Finally, it will continue to advocate for 
improved logistical access to support partner interventions.  
2. Common Services  and Logistics Capacity Augment ation: The Logistics Cluster will support the humanitarian 
community by providing equipment, services, and technical expertise to augment the logistics capabilities of the 
humanitarian community to deliver emergency assistance. It will facilitate the provision of common services to 
address identified gaps, as outlined in the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). 
 
The following services will be made available to the humanitarian community until December 2026 and may be reviewed 
as the context evolves. The Logistics Cluster is closely monitoring the situation and continuing to assess partners’ capacity 
and needs in the event of situational changes that could lead to a scale -up in humanitarian interventions.  
 
1. Coordination and Information Management 
 
The following coordination and information management services are provided to help mitigate the duplication of efforts 
by humanitarian actors, enable the use of available logistics resources and expertise, share logistics data and information, 
ensure effective engagement with interagency forums, support operational decision -making, and engage in advocacy to 
address operational challenges. 
• Coordination: The Logistics Cluster maintains coordination cells in Port Sudan, Khartoum, and eastern Chad 
(Farchana and Adre). The Port Sudan hub focuses on country-level activities and convenes regular coordination 
meetings, accessible both in -person and remotely,  to address common logistics and operational challenges  at 
both national and sub -national levels . It coordinates with key interagency forums including  the Inter-Cluster 
Coordination Group (ICCG)  at national and regional levels , Area -Based Coordination  (ABC) forums, and the 
Humanitarian Access Working Group  (HAWG), as well as the Logistics Cluster in South Sudan  on strategic 
planning and pipeline information to enhance response actions.  The Khartoum and eastern Chad cells support 
sub-national coordination and cross-border operations.  
• Convoys: The Logistics Cluster serves as a coordination platform for humanitarian road convoys to hard-to-reach 
locations in close collaboration with WFP and other partners who organize movements and negotiate access. 
Given the evolving security and access context, there is no fixed convoy schedule ; convoy opportunities are 
announced thro ugh multiple channels and interest is accepted on a rolling bas is. Partners are encouraged to 
preposition cargo in Kosti and Ad Dabbah for onward deliveries to the Darfur and Kordofan regions.
Concept of Operations, June 2026 
Sudan   
 
 
This Concept of Operations is a live document, and the activities will be adapted and revised as the situation unfolds and further 
assessment results become available, including the possible provision of additional logistics common services as required by the 
humanitarian community.  
 
• Operational information sharing: Relevant information is consolidated, analysed, and shared regarding customs 
processes, logistics resources, entry points status, road transport routes, shared storage capacities, logistics -
related SOPs, and access constraints through multiple communication channels including the Sudan webpage, 
Logistics Cluster app, Sudan and Chad LCAs, LogIE, an email mailing list, and a WhatsApp group. Partners can 
sign up to the Sudan Logistics Cluster mailing list and WhatsApp group using this link.  
The Logistics Cluster continuously monitors and analyses supply chains and the situational context including the 
status of entry points and corridors into Sudan, the availability of logistics service providers, market disruptions, 
and partners’ logistics strategies and planned movements  to ensure timely information is available to guide 
logistics planning and response efforts. The Logistics Cluster also shares relevant updates from the OCHA Access 
Unit with partners. 
• Advocacy: Partners’ logistics constraints are collected, analysed, and shared with relevant coordination groups 
to ensure logistics perspectives are included in broader strategies. 
2. Common Services and Logistics Capacity Augmentation 
 
The services facilitated by the Logistics Cluster are not intended to replace the logistics capacities of individual agencies 
or organisations. They are intended to augment partners’ capacities to increase the efficiency of the response, mitigate 
bottlenecks, and avoid the duplication of efforts. The services are designed to address identified gaps in the humanitarian 
supply chain that limit the ability of the humanitarian community to meet the needs of the affected population. Access 
permitting, the following activities and services are provided at no cost to the user organizations. 
 
Storage 
1. The Logistics Cluster augments the storage capacity of humanitarian organisations through free-to-user common 
storage facilities in Port Sudan ( 12,000 m2), Gedaref ( 1,250 m2), Kassala ( 640 m2), Kosti (4,000 m2), Al Dabbah 
(900 m2), El Obeid (500 m 2) and Tawila (880 m2). The Logistics Cluster may loan mobile storage units (MSUs) to 
augment partners’ storage capacity in locations where it is not present, on a case-by-case basis. 
2. A total of 354 m2 of temperature-controlled storage (15°C to 25°C) is available in Port Sudan.  
 
Road Cargo Transport 
1. The Logistics Cluster does not intend to offer a permanent road transport service or to set up a service that 
would replace partners’ existing capacities . As a Provider of L ast Resort (PoLR), WFP, through the Logistics 
Cluster, may support cargo road transport to a limited number of locations in Sudan  (security and access 
permitting). Partners’ requests will be assessed  and accepted on a case-by-case basis as determined by  clear 
criteria in line with the concept of Last Resort. 
 
As the situation evolves, including expanded or decreased access through different entry points and the potential for 
augmented air cargo transportation activities, the Logistics Cluster will continue to collect information on developments
Concept of Operations, June 2026 
Sudan   
 
 
This Concept of Operations is a live document, and the activities will be adapted and revised as the situation unfolds and further 
assessment results become available, including the possible provision of additional logistics common services as required by the 
humanitarian community.  
in the operating context and practical operational arrangements  to best support partners within the Logistics Clusters’ 
mandate. 
 
As PoLR, WFP, through the Logistics Cluster, is responsible only for providing logistics services that address identified 
common gaps in logistics capacity, where access and funding permit , and where these gaps limit the ability of the 
humanitarian community to meet the needs of the affected population. All customs formalities associated with the 
importation of relief items into Sudan are the responsibility of the requesting partner.
Concept of Operations, June 2026 
Sudan   
 
 
This Concept of Operations is a live document, and the activities will be adapted and revised as the situation unfolds and further 
assessment results become available, including the possible provision of additional logistics common services as required by the 
humanitarian community.  
Annex 1 – Concept of Operations