In Gaza, over 70 per cent of people rely on trucked water, but funding gaps are putting this supply at risk. In the West Bank, people’s reliance on
water trucking is increasing. Aid workers repairing a water well in northern Gaza. Photo by UNRWA
13 Jun 2026
Table of contents
Highlights
The situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory is rapidly deteriorating, the UN Secretary-General warns. 
In the West Bank, more than one third of essential medicines is out of stock and over 11,000 surgeries have been postponed since
the beginning of 2026, the Palestinian Ministry of Health warns. 
Since January, more than 1,000 settler attacks caused casualties or property damage across more than 230 communities, with over
2,200 Palestinians displaced in this context. 
Since January, more than 100 incidents of demolition or settler violence have damaged or destroyed over 190 structures related to
water and sanitation across the West Bank, increasing reliance on emergency water trucking in vulnerable communities. 
In Gaza, over 70 per cent of people rely on trucked water, but funding gaps are putting this supply at risk. 
Displaced families in overcrowded sites, damaged buildings and makeshift shelters will soon be exposed to extreme summer
temperatures, while access restrictions and lengthy clearance procedures continue to affect the timely delivery of critical shelter
and non-food items and funding shortfalls threaten procurement and pre-positioning of winter supplies.  
While some 2,000 sites have been treated for pests since mid-May, skin diseases and infections continue to rise owing to limited
access to safe water, sanitation and treatment, and access to landfills remaining restricted, causing continuous accumulation of
waste in populated areas. 
Overview
The situation across the Occupied Palestinian Territory is deteriorating quickly. This was articulated most recently by Secretary-General
António Guterres on 10 June in his remarks to the Security Council. 
“Despite the ceasefire announced eight months ago,” he said, “Gaza still faces profound uncertainty and immense human suffering.
Violence is on the rise, with civilians killed on a daily basis. Humanitarian operations remain heavily constrained. Basic human needs –
 for clean water, sanitation, food, shelter, health care, and more – are going unmet. And the Israeli Government is declaring its intent to
control 70 per cent of the Strip.” 
With regards to the West Bank, Mr. Guterres cited “alarming reports ]…[ of settler violence – now averaging six attacks per day. The
demolition of homes, destruction of farms, and confiscation of land. The relentless expansion of illegal Israeli settlements. The ongoing
displacement of Palestinians at levels not seen since 1967. The threat of an attempted annexation that would – like the decades-long
Humanitarian Situation Report | 12 June
2026
occupation – have no legal validity.” 
The Secretary-General warned of a “presumption of impunity” throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory. “These injustices must
stop,” he said. “Member States must comply with all their obligations under international law. No exceptions.” 
West Bank
The Palestinian Ministry of Health warned on 4 June of a rapidly worsening shortage of medicines, laboratory supplies and medical
consumables, which it attributes to the prolonged withholding of Palestinian clearance revenues. According to the Ministry, more than
one-third of essential medicines have reached zero stock levels, including 180 of 520 medicines on the Essential Medicines List and 50
of 97 cancer treatment drugs. Overall, 726 pharmaceutical items and medical consumables are reportedly out of stock, including 265
specialized medical consumables and 79 laboratory items. The Ministry warned that the lives of more than 4,000 cancer patients and
thousands of dialysis patients are at risk due to shortages of cancer medicines, dialysis filters and other critical medical supplies.
These shortages and the effects of the broader financial crisis have also affected the provision of health services, with more than
11,000 scheduled surgeries reportedly postponed since the beginning of 2026. The Ministry appealed for urgent international support to
sustain essential health services and prevent further deterioration in healthcare provision. 
Against this backdrop, Health Cluster partners continue to support the delivery of essential health services through a network of 870
service points across the West Bank, including 59 hospitals, 477 primary health care centres, 230 mobile clinic locations and 16
emergency centres. Despite efforts to maintain service provision in affected areas, response operations continue to face significant
constraints, including access restrictions, movement obstacles, shortages of medicines, medical supplies and consumables, and
reduced operational capacity. As a result, many health facilities have reduced their operating days and working hours, limiting the
availability and accessibility of healthcare services for affected populations. 
Beyond public services, humanitarian partners continue to report growing needs linked to the combined effects of displacement,
movement restrictions and deteriorating socioeconomic conditions. According to the World Food Programme (WFP), over 300,000
people received food and cash-based assistance in May, including food-insecure households, displaced families and vulnerable herding
communities. The continued scale of assistance underscores the sustained impact of access restrictions, loss of livelihoods, and
recurrent displacement on household resilience and reliance on humanitarian support across the West Bank. 
Casualties and Settler Violence  
Between 2 and 8 June (the reporting period of the West Bank updates in this report), Israeli forces killed two Palestinians in the West
Bank, bringing the total number of Palestinians killed since the beginning of 2026 to 57, including 13 children and two women. One of
the two killed was a seven-month-old baby in Hebron city after Israeli forces opened fire on a vehicle injuring both parents. On the same
day, on 5 June, near Beitin village in Ramallah governorate, Israeli forces shot, killed and withheld the body of a Palestinian man who,
according to the Israeli military, was among several people who threw Molotov cocktails at vehicles on the main road.  
During the same period, over 48 Palestinians, including six children, were injured by Israeli forces or settlers, and one Israeli was injured
after he was struck by a car driven by a Palestinian near Efrata Israeli settlement junction south of Bethlehem governorate. More than
60 per cent of Palestinian injuries (31 of 48) occurred during settler attacks, while most of the remaining injuries were reported during
Israeli forces’ search operations and other raids. 
Settler attacks also caused widespread damage to Palestinian property, livelihoods and essential infrastructure. OCHA documented at
least 49 settler attacks that resulted in casualties, property damage, or both, bringing the number of such incidents recorded since the
beginning of 2026 to over 1,000 across over 230 communities, an average of six incidents per day. 
Many of the attacks affected agricultural livelihoods and productive assets. Across Nablus, Hebron and Bethlehem governorates,
settlers vandalized at least 100 olive trees and saplings, set fire to more than 170 dunums (42 acres) of cultivated land planted with
wheat and seasonal crops, and damaged agricultural and livestock-related infrastructure. Elsewhere, settlers damaged an electricity
pole supplying a Palestinian poultry farm and a fish-farming facility, stole livestock-related assets, and obstructed efforts to restore
water and electricity services in affected communities. 
Property Damage and Displacement  
During the reporting period, Israeli authorities demolished 21 Palestinian-owned structures. These included eight homes and 13
livelihood-related, water and sanitation, and other structures for lacking Israeli-issued building permits, which are nearly impossible for
Palestinians to obtain. Overall, 20 structures were demolished in Area C and one in East Jerusalem, resulting in the displacement of six
households comprising 29 people, including eight children, of whom 26 people were displaced in Area C and three in East Jerusalem. 
Between 20 May and 2 June, 27 Palestinian Bedouin families comprising 125 people, including 71 children, were displaced from Fer'a
(also known as ‘Ein Fera’a area) in Hebron governorate following months of reported Israeli settler harassment, intimidation and threats.
Since January 2023, more than 6,100 Palestinians have been displaced from Bedouin and herding communities, including about 2,200
people in 2026 alone, while 119 communities have experienced full or partial displacement, including 46 communities that have been
fully displaced. 
Humanitarian partners continue to respond to growing needs among displaced and at-risk communities. According to the Shelter
Cluster, between 1 and 7 June, partners reached approximately 150 households, comprising more than 680 people, including persons
with disabilities (approximately 10 per cent), across multiple governorates in the West Bank with emergency and recovery shelter
assistance. Tulkarm governorate accounted for nearly two-thirds of the response due to ongoing displacement from Tulkarm and Nur
Shams refugee camps. Assistance included repairs to shelters that sustained minor-to-moderate damage, shelter rehabilitation and
improvement works, cash rental assistance, shelter protection measures such as doors, fences and windows, and the distribution of
emergency shelter and non-food items, including bedding kits, kitchen sets and tents. Cash and cash-based interventions accounted for
approximately 46 per cent of assistance provided, followed by in-kind assistance (32 per cent), combined cash and in-kind assistance
(15 per cent), and vouchers (7 per cent). 
Access to Water 
According to the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Cluster, access to water and sanitation services across the West Bank remains
constrained as a consequence of settler violence, movement restrictions, demolitions and damage to infrastructure, particularly in the
northern West Bank, Masafer Yatta in Hebron governorate, and other herding communities in Area C.  
Since the beginning of 2026, more than 100 demolition and settler violence-related incidents have resulted in damage to or the
demolition of over 190 WASH structures across the West Bank, including pipelines, irrigation systems, and water tanks. This is broadly
consistent with 2025 levels, when an average of 25 such incidents were documented each month. These incidents continue to disrupt
and undermine Palestinians’ access to water sources, heightening reliance on emergency interventions, such as water trucking.  
The impact on Bedouin and herding communities in Area C is particularly acute. For example, on 4 and 5 June, Israeli settlers from
surrounding settlement outposts repeatedly vandalized the main water pipelines serving Khan al Ahmar–Makab as Samen and Khan al
Ahmar–Mihtawish Bedouin communities in Jerusalem governorate, disrupting water access for all 57 households in both communities
for approximately one day. According to residents, settlers punctured multiple sections of the pipelines and cut parts of them.
Residents reported recurrent attacks on the pipelines, including two separate incidents on 4 June after repairs had been completed,
alongside repeated damage to water infrastructure, settler trespassing, harassment, and restrictions on access to grazing areas. In
Masafer Yatta, at least 10 communities have remained disconnected from the water network since January, following repeated settler
damage to, and interference with, the main transmission pipeline, resulting in continued reliance on emergency water trucking. 
To mitigate the impact of these challenges, WASH partners continue to implement emergency and resilience-focused interventions
across the West Bank, including through water trucking, the distribution of hygiene kits, mobile latrines, and water storage solutions.
Moreover, in the northern West Bank, where more than 33,000 Palestinians have been displaced from Jenin, Tulkarm and Nur Shams
refugee camps and surrounding areas since early 2025, partners continue to provide water trucking, hygiene kits, and support to local
service providers serving displaced populations. 
In May, partners provided water trucking support to approximately 30 communities and locations where displaced families have moved,
including 10 communities in Masafer Yatta, nine communities in the northern Jordan Valley, and locations hosting displaced families in
Hebron, Ramallah, Jericho, Salfit, Jenin, and Tulkarm governorates. 
See Annex 1 for selected incidents in the West Bank during the reporting period. 
For key figures and additional breakdowns of casualties, displacement, and settler violence between January 2005 and April 2026,
please refer to the OCHA West Bank April 2026 Snapshot.
Gaza Strip 
Civilians and civilian infrastructure are exposed to Israeli airstrikes, shelling and gunfire, resulting in reported casualties and damage.
According to the Ministry of Health (MoH) in Gaza, which operates under the de facto authorities, 39 Palestinians were killed, two
bodies were retrieved, four died of wounds, and 199 people were injured between 3 and 10 June. This brings the overall reported
casualty toll since the announcement of a ceasefire agreement on 10 October 2025 to 981 fatalities and 3,104 injuries, according to
MoH. 
On 10 June, OHCHR expressed concern over repeated reports of violent activity by “Palestinian armed elements in Gaza that appear to
be backed by Israeli forces.” The day before, according to OHCHR, such elements detained several Palestinians, including seven
ambulance crew members from the Palestine Red Crescent Society (PRCS). While five were later released, two were taken to an
unknown location, according to OHCHR, who called for their immediate release, stressing Israel’s obligations as the occupying power to
ensure public order and safety “and to refrain from, as well as prevent, such violations of international law, including the obstruction of
medical services.” On 11 June, PRCS said one of the two has been released. 
Meanwhile, humanitarian partners report a deteriorating child protection environment, with poverty, displacement and insecurity
heightening risks of neglect, hazardous labour, family separation, and exposure to violence. Children face severe psychological distress
and risks from explosive ordnance, while access constraints, resource shortages, and limited supplies continue to hinder the delivery of
child protection and mental health and psychosocial support services. More broadly, protection partners report critical shortages of
dignity kits and menstrual hygiene management (MHM) items, with stocks nearly depleted despite high demand among women and
girls. 
The pest-control campaign is ongoing with over 2,000 sites treated since mid-May. Nevertheless, skin diseases and ectoparasitic
infections continue to rise, while partners report that pest and rodent infestations are also increasing stress levels and contributing to a
rise in domestic violence. This is because people remain displaced in overcrowded settings, with limited access to safe water, hygiene
supplies and timely treatment, and because landfills near Gaza’s eastern perimeter remain inaccessible, perpetuating the accumulation
of waste within populated areas.  
Between 1 and 9 June, just over one million litres of diesel could be taken into Gaza. That amount falls short of the volumes required to
keep life-saving operations running. Low volumes of incoming fuel have, in turn, forced humanitarian partners to prioritize the most
critical operations identified by clusters, leading to the scaling back of some non-critical activities. 
The WASH cluster reports, for instance, that in the north, limited fuel deliveries last week forced disruptions and rotational operation of
key services, including relocation of solid waste from Firas Market and the functioning of water and sanitation infrastructure in Gaza
city. 
For over 70 per cent of the population, the primary source of drinking water is truck deliveries.  These are difficult to sustain. While
humanitarian partners are mitigating gaps linked to four partners phasing out water trucking since mid-May, funding remains
insufficient to keep the current coverage, let alone scale it up during the summer. 
Compounding these challenges, access restrictions and lengthy clearance procedures for the entry of aid items continue to affect the
timely delivery of critical shelter and non-food items, with needs outpacing available resources, particularly among displaced
households living in overcrowded sites, damaged buildings, and makeshift shelters that will be increasingly exposed to extreme
summer temperatures, limiting partners’ ability to respond effectively to emerging priorities. 
Food Security and Markets 
According to the World Food Programme’s (WFP) latest Gaza Market Monitor, during the first half of May 2026, food consumption,
availability and prices improved slightly compared with April, attributed to a reported increase in the inflow of commercial and
humanitarian supplies. Surveys reported by WFP show a decrease – from 75 per cent in April to 63 per cent – in households reporting
difficulties in accessing markets. Among households facing difficulties, 93 per cent cited financial struggles due to lack of cash and 54
per cent indicated they could not afford basic food items due to their high prices.  WFP warns that the intake of fruit and protein-rich
foods remained limited to once a week or less, perpetuating the risk of malnutrition, particularly among children. WFP say that overall
prices remain high compared with late February (the eve of the regional escalation). Fuel and cooking gas are said to have remained
scarce and extremely expensive, leading 66 per cent to rely on waste burning to cook, according to WFP. 
According to data from the Gaza Chamber of Commerce, between 1 and 7 June the prices of food items, particularly fresh products,
declined by 15 or more percent compared with the previous week, but remain significantly higher than pre-October 2023 levels. Non-
food prices remained stable compared with the previous week, though still elevated, with the exception of sanitary pads, now cheaper
than before October 2023. Overall, according to the Chamber of Commerce, the Gaza Consumer Price Index fell from 235 per cent in
May to 199 per cent in early June, indicating some easing of inflation, though it remains unclear if this trend is sustainable given the
volatile regional situation. 
Meanwhile, the Chamber of Commerce reports that cash-out commission rates further declined to 10 per cent, down from higher levels
observed in previous months, and remained largely stable. According to the Cash Working Group (CWG), this gradual reduction
marginally improves purchasing power for beneficiaries relying on cash transactions, although persistent liquidity shortages continue to
limit the scope for further decreases. Overall, data gathered by the CWG indicates that markets remain under significant strain, with
constrained and uneven supply chains, limited diversification of goods, and persistent structural challenges continuing to undermine
market recovery and household resilience. 
Incoming Supplies 
On the evening of 7 June, Israeli authorities temporarily closed Kerem Shalom and the Rafah Crossing, citing security measures linked
to missile attacks from Iran. On 8 June, they announced that Kerem Shalom would resume operations the following day, and that Rafah
would also reopen. Throughout the temporary closure, UN and partners could still collect cargo from the Palestinians side of Kerem
Shalom, but other operations had to be suspended: cargo offloading resumed on 9 June and support to medical evacuations and
returnees resumed on 10 June. 
As reported previously, Kerem Shalom is the only active entry point for approved cargo.  Access to that location from within Gaza is
channelled through a new road, with a new military checkpoint, where convoys have been facing delays and congestion.  
Between 1 and 7 June, the UN and partners took into Gaza thousands of metric tons of food as well as nutrition items, provisions
related to health, water and sanitation, shelter materials, education supplies and other essential goods. During that period, 62 per cent
of all aid trucks from Egypt could offload at the Israeli-controlled Kerem Shalom Crossing, based on data tracked by the Logistics
Cluster. By contrast, shipments from Ashdod Port in Israel resulted in successful offloading at Kerem Shalom in 94 per cent of cases. 
On the commercial front, data from the Gaza Chamber of Commerce, provided to the Cash Working Group suggest that between 1 and
7 June, the private sector collected 817 truckloads of products into Gaza. Of them, 374 carried food items and 23 cooking gas,
representing 48 per cent of the total, while another 153 carried essential non-food items – including hygiene, shelter, and small
quantities of childcare supplies – with no medicines or agricultural inputs recorded. About one-third of supplies were non-essential
goods, according to the dataset. 
On 25 May, a new storage facility secured by the Logistics Cluster became operational for both UN and non-UN partners, following
approval from the Israeli authorities.  
The UN is only able to confirm the entry of supplies tracked by UN 2720. For breakdowns of those, see the online UN 2720 Mechanism
Dashboard. 
For a detailed account of the latest humanitarian operations in Gaza, see Annex 1 below. 
Funding
Sources: Financial Tracking System and oPt HF
Annexes
Annex 1: Selected incidents in the West Bank during reporting period (2-8 June 2026)
Annex 2: Humanitarian Operations in the Gaza Strip by Cluster
This section covers 1 to 7 June unless otherwise specified. 
Food Security
Read more +
Read more −
Partners provided general food assistance to 69,000 households (262,000 people) as part of the monthly distribution
cycle. Each family received two parcels, one 25-kilogram flour bag and 2.5 kilograms of high energy biscuits, covering 75
per cent of the minimum caloric needs. 
While some families continue to receive assistance through in-kind monthly food distributions, an increasing number of
households are now receiving monthly multi-purpose cash assistance, coordinated by the Cash Working Group, which
helps meet food needs and supports overall food security. 
As of 3 June, partners were preparing almost 740,000 meals every day through 95 kitchens at more than 1,000 locations.
Compared with 1.5 million daily meals in mid-March, production has declined significantly. While these efforts remain
critical, partners have scaled down cooked meal production due to funding constraints and rising operational costs. At the
same time, responders are seeking to diversify assistance modalities, to include more cash and livelihood support. 
Twenty-eight UN-supported bakeries produce some 120,000 two-kilogram bread bundles daily. One fifth of the bread is
distributed free of charge to more than 300 shelters and community sites, while the remainder is sold at a subsidized
price of NIS 3 (US$0.95) per bundle through 160 retailers. 
During the first ten days of June, partners supported over 2,200 herders, giving each of them one 50-kilogram bag of
concentrated fodder and one bag of barley. 
Since late March, partners have been providing conditional cash assistance to more than 1,000 farmers to support the
reactivation of local crop production. Following the release of the first instalment in previous months, the second
disbursement began in June, with about 500 targeted farmers having received it to date. 
On 3 June, the private sector imported a limited quantity of engine oil for a small number of bakeries. Advocacy remains
critical to facilitate the entry of engine oil and spare parts through commercial channels, in addition to humanitarian
pathways. 
Water, Health and Sanitation (WASH) 
Partners trained professionals on the use of chlorine to improve water quality and distributed more than 11,500 hygiene
kits, 273,000 bars of soap, 1,500 jerrycans, 500 adult diapers, 100 dignity kits, and 12 rat traps, reaching more than 69,000
people cumulatively. 
On 2 June, the Mekorot water pipeline from Israel in Bani Suhaila was damaged due to road excavation by the Israeli
military, lowering pumping capacity and affecting water provision to about 200,000 people in Khan Younis. The pipeline
was initially out of service and subsequently operated at reduced capacity before the Palestinian Water Authority
completed repair works on 8 June. 
Health
As of 7 June, 31 emergency medical teams (EMTs) were deployed across Gaza, comprising 312 national and 74
international health personnel. The cluster has introduced a new tool that allows EMT partners to schedule rotations into
Gaza at least two months in advance. 
Between 30 May and 6 June, communicable diseases accounted for nearly 28 per cent of all consultations reported
through the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Early Warning, Alert and Response System (EWARS). Acute respiratory
infections and acute watery diarrhea remained the most frequently reported conditions, although both showed a
decreasing trend. By contrast, skin diseases and ectoparasitic infections continued to increase, likely driven by
overcrowded living conditions, limited access to safe water and hygiene supplies, and delays in accessing appropriate
treatment.  
In coordination with the Site Management Cluster, partners trained and deployed 129 new focal points in shelters and
other high-risk settings, enhancing the early detection and reporting of public health risks. 
The Mental Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS) Technical Working Group continues to support the expansion of
MHPSS services across partners, with training of trainers underway on WHO’s Mental Health Gap Action Programme
community toolkit and coordination of an MHPSS modality known as “Teaching Recovery Techniques (TRT)” to expand
psychosocial support for children and adolescents. The Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) guidelines relating to
the MHPSS Minimum Service Package have been adapted to the Gaza context and will be disseminated across partners
to support standardized service delivery. 
For more information, see the online Heath Cluster Dashboard. 
Shelter
Between 31 May and 6 June, partners provided more than 4,000 households with shelter and other essential items
through in-kind and cash-based modalities. Assistance included 955 tents, 1,168 tarpaulins, 475 bedding items, 150
bedding kits, 150 kitchen sets, and 1,544 clothing kits provided through cash and voucher assistance. 
Partners conducted emergency repairs and upgrades to 749 makeshift shelters, alongside urgent repairs to 40 damaged
housing units.  
On 8 June, the Shelter Cluster published its Summer Preparedness Priorities, outlining priority interventions, operational
recommendations, community coping mechanisms, and advocacy priorities to improve shelter conditions during the
summer months.
A few examples of what is still needed: There is an urgent need to initiate procurement and pre-positioning of winterization
materials to ensure readiness ahead of the upcoming winter season. However, significant funding shortfalls threaten
preparedness efforts and risk to undermine the humanitarian community's capacity to meet anticipated seasonal shelter
needs.  
For more information, see the Shelter Cluster website. 
Protection 
Protection partners delivered lifesaving and protection-related services to at least 27,700 people, in addition to 260
vulnerable households, across North Gaza, Gaza city, Deir al Balah and Khan Younis governorates: 
Mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS), including psychological first aid (PFA) and individual and group
counselling, to 10,365 people; 
“Helping the Helpers” support to 573 humanitarian and protection workers;  
Legal counselling, legal awareness, support with Housing, Land and Property Rights-related dispute resolution, and
alternative dispute resolution training for lawyers to reached 1,384 individuals, while protection awareness sessions
on rights, complaints and feedback mechanisms, safe reporting channels, PSEA, and referral pathways reached
2,646 individuals.  
Case management, case follow-up and referral services to 600 individuals; 
Disability-related services, including rehabilitation, prosthetic and orthotic support, physiotherapy, speech therapy,
and provision of assistive devices and services, to 696 people; 
Explosive Ordnance Risk Education sessions to 6,705 individuals; 
In addition, partners reached 4,732 people and 260 vulnerable households through the provision of shelter items,
tents, food parcels, dignity kits, cash for protection, livelihood support, and latrines.  
The Protection Cluster also offered services to 311 returnees through psychological first aid, emergency assistance, and
referral services. This brings the cumulative number of returnees supported since the reopening of the Rafah Crossing in
February 2026 to 2,973, of whom 981 continue receiving follow-up protection support.  
Protection monitoring activities continued through 13 focus group discussions (FGDs) and 130 key informant interviews
(KIIs) with community members across 12 accessible neighbourhoods, reaching 1,430 people cumulatively.  
Findings from the most recent Protection Monitoring Snapshot highlight persisting concerns regarding food insecurity,
shortages of safe drinking water, inadequate shelter conditions, and environmental health hazards, including rodent and
insect infestations linked to poor waste management. Communities also reported challenges in obtaining civil
documentation, while the presence of unexploded ordnance (UXO) continued to raise significant safety concerns,
particularly for children. Communities living near high-risk areas faced heightened protection risks, while insecurity and
movement restrictions further hindered access to humanitarian assistance and essential services. 
For more information, see the online Protection Cluster dashboard. 
Child Protection 
Child Protection partners undertook the following activities: 
provided at least 17,800 children and caregivers with a wide range of services, including case management, alternative
care, family reunification, MHPSS, psychosocial support, counselling, recreational activities, child-friendly space
interventions, awareness raising, and emergency assistance. Additionally, 1,149 families received emergency or material
support; 
provided individualized case management to 200 at-risk children, including 31 children with disabilities, supported 44
unaccompanied and separated children with alternative care, and reunified six children with their families; 
continued to scale up MHPSS services, with over 5,000 children participating in psychosocial and mental health activities,
including 500 receiving specialized interventions. At least 2,000 caregivers were also reached through parenting and
psychosocial support activities; 
strengthened prevention and awareness efforts, reaching 3,432 children and caregivers through face-to-face child
protection sessions, 211 through explosive ordnance risk education, and around 5,000 through mass awareness
messaging on key protection risks and prevention measures; 
expanded adolescent programming, reaching at least 250 adolescents through life skills, empowerment, vocational
training, and psychosocial support, with targeted activities addressing risks such as school dropout, child labour, early
marriage, and psychological distress; 
delivered rehabilitation and assistive devices to 680 children with disabilities, while 69 families received counselling.
However, significant gaps remain in specialized services, assistive devices, and access to advanced care; 
implemented child safety mapping and participatory activities in four camps, engaging 182 children to identify risks and
inform mitigation measures in displacement settings; 
provided emergency assistance to mitigate protection risks, including hygiene kits, dignity kits, vouchers and cash
assistance for 539 families hosting children without parental care, and in-kind support for highly vulnerable children. 
Addressing Gender-Based Violence
Partners undertook the following activities to address gender-based violence (GBV): 
continued delivering services primarily through safe spaces for women and girls, opened eight new such spaces, bringing
the total number of functional spaces to 73, while 19 remain closed due to funding constraints. Two safe shelters also
continue operating and provide protection services to vulnerable women and girls; 
provided multisectoral support to more than 24,000 people, including 15,700 women and girls who participated in group
MHPSS activities, and 2,095 people who received specialized MHPSS care; 
delivered specialized GBV case management services to 1,565 women and girls, including cash-for-protection assistance
and referrals for 262 cases; 
conducted community awareness and outreach activities, reaching 12,183 females and 5,190 males on topics including
domestic violence, sexual and reproductive health, prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse (PSEA), and referral
pathways; 
strengthened the capacity of frontline providers, with 550 personnel trained on addressing GBV and on PSEA; 
distributed 3,741 dignity kits to women and girls, though needs continue to exceed available resources. 
Mine Action 
Between 1 and 7 June, UNMAS conducted 50 explosive hazard assessments in support of debris removal and other
partner activities, and two inter-agency missions.  Seven emergency response teams were also carried out in support of
UNDSS. 
Between 23 May and 4 June, explosive ordnance risk education and Conflict Preparedness and Protection activities
continued, reaching almost 14,000 people. 
Nutrition 
On 2 June, the Nutrition Cluster launched a Standardized Monitoring and Assessment of Relief and Transitions (SMART)
survey to better assess the prevalence of acute and other forms of malnutrition, along with the contributing factors. The
survey is expected to be completed next week.  
In May, partners screened 77,197 children between the ages of 6 and 59 months, out of whom 3,180 (4.1 per cent) were
identified with acute malnutrition and admitted for treatment, including 478 (0.6 per cent) with the most severe acute
malnutrition (SAM) form. The latest admissions bring the total number of children who received ready-to-use therapeutic
food for treatment in the last five months to 17,392.
In May, partners also screened 53,593 pregnant and breastfeeding women (PBW) for acute malnutrition, of whom 1,683
(3.14 per cent) were admitted for treatment and reached over 55,900 PBW and other caregivers with a combination of
group and one-on-one counselling on Infant and Young Child Feeding in Emergencies (IYCF-E). 
Education 
Education Cluster partners continued efforts to enhance the inclusivity of the response by scaling up the screening of
children with disabilities to better identify and address barriers to learning. To date, approximately 22,000 children enrolled
in learning spaces have been screened, with 27 per cent identified as requiring more in-depth assessment. Through
established referral pathways, these children are being referred to specialised service providers for further evaluation and
support. The most commonly identified needs relate to speech and visual impairments. While some interventions,
including speech therapy, are being provided, the limited availability and entry of assistive devices remain a major
challenge. Increased access to assistive devices is critical to enable children with disabilities to participate independently
and meaningfully in learning activities. 
The entry of education supplies remains severely constrained. Although 865 School-in-a-Carton kits, sufficient for 46,000
students, entered Gaza on 1 June, this followed a prolonged period with no education supplies entering since 19 May.
With the academic year scheduled to conclude on 17 June, many children will complete it without receiving essential
learning materials, undermining both the quality of learning and their ability to fully participate in educational activities. 
Preparations for the 2026 Tawjihi examinations (high-school final exams) continue; however, significant operational
challenges remain. Many planned examination centres, including temporary learning spaces, lack adequate furniture,
safety measures, and essential logistical support. Limited printing capacity is also constraining efforts to produce and
distribute examination papers in time for the scheduled start date of 20 June. While partners are working to address
these gaps, there is growing concern that examinations may need to be administered electronically, as in the previous
academic year. Such a scenario risks excluding students who lack access to appropriate devices, reliable internet
connectivity, or electricity. In addition, students have had limited opportunities to familiarise themselves with or test the
examination platform, which may negatively affect their performance. 
** Double asterisks indicate that a figure, sentence, or section has been rectified, added, or retracted after the initial publication of this
update.