Iran vows not 'a single drop' of oil or gas will transit Hormuz strait if US 'aggression' continues
Iran’s Revolutionary Guard says it has targeted US aircraft in Jordan’s Aqaba airport with ballistic missiles
.
It also claimed on Monday that two oil tankers ⁠had exploded ⁠and been immobilised ​after attempting to transit what it ⁠described as an unsafe southern route through the strait ⁠of Hormuz, alleging they had been ​encouraged ‌by the ‌US military to use the passage.
The statement from the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps gave no details on the vessels’ names, flags, crews or any ‌casualties, Reuters reports, saying it could not immediately verify the incident.
The Guard said the strait would remain unsafe ​as long as what it called US “aggression” in the region continued, warning that “this passage will ⁠not be safe for the ​transit ​of petrochemical products, ​nor even a single ​drop ‌of oil ​and ​gas”.
It also warned the US military to prepare for a “punitive operation”.
Share
Updated at 
22.37 EDT
Key events
In case you’re just joining us, here’s a recap of the latest events as US-Iran hostilities continue and fuel concerns of a slide towards all-out war. It’s 9.30am in Tehran and 2am in Washington DC.




US forces launched a ninth consecutive night of strikes against Iran on Monday
 as the number of confirmed American military deaths in the renewed fighting 
rose to three
.




US Central Command ​said it started a new wave of strikes aimed at “degrading” Iran’s ability
 to attack commercial vessels in the strait of Hormuz.




US ⁠missiles struck several Iranian cities early on Monday
, according to Iran’s semi-official Tasnim news agency. Explosions were heard in Tabriz, Chabahar, Konarak, Bandar Mahshahr and Bandar Imam Khomeini, it said.




Donald Trump said the latest US strikes were being carried out in honour of the US service members killed in recent days
. “We hit them very hard again tonight, and we did that in honour of the probably three, it’s probably three great patriots,” Trump told reporters as he returned to Washington after the World Cup final.




The US military said a 
service member had been killed
 on Saturday in northern ⁠Iraq during a controlled detonation on a downed Iranian attack drone. Earlier in the weekend it said 
two of its service personnel were killed
 in Jordan. It brought the total number of US military personnel killed since the war began to 17, with more than 420 others wounded. Iran’s health ministry said on ‌Saturday that 
50 people had been killed
 ​and more than 500 injured in US strikes ​on the country over the past three weeks.




Iran’s Revolutionary Guard said it hit US military targets in Kuwait
 
and targeted US aircraft in Jordan’s Aqaba airport with ballistic missiles
, while sirens sounded in Bahrain on Monday and the Guard also announced a surprise strike against “the enemy’s special operations headquarters in Syria’s Al-Tanf area”.




The Royal Navy’s ​United Kingdom Maritime Operations Centre said late Sunday it received a report that a vessel was on fire off the Omani coas
t. The Revolutionary Guard later claimed two
 
oil tankers were blown up after attempting to transit through the southern route of the strait. There was no independent confirmation.




The Guard said the strait would remain unsafe ​as long as what it called US “aggression” in the region continued
, warning that “this passage will ⁠not be safe for the ​transit ​of petrochemical products, ​nor even a single ​drop ‌of oil ​and ​gas”. It also warned the US military to prepare for a “punitive operation”.




The price of oil jumped in early Asian trade on Monday
 after the US carried out its latest wave of strikes on Iran and a vessel caught fire in the strait of Hormuz. Brent crude for September delivery rose 2.72% to $90.50 a barrel by around 0100 GMT, after briefly crossing $91 – its highest price since June.




US secretary of state Marco Rubio said Iran was using the strait of Hormuz as leverage in the ongoing Middle East conflict and that 
other countries needed to step up pressure to protect global shipping
.


Iran war in spotlight at Asean talks
South-east Asia’s top diplomats will express alarm over renewed hostilities in the Middle East
 when they gather in the Philippine capital on Tuesday for talks to be joined by western and Asian counterparts, including from the US, China, Russia and the EU.
Foreign ministers of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean) will first meet among themselves in Manila on Tuesday to discuss – among other main concerns – the US-Iran hostilities that have triggered fears of a return to a full-blown war. They plan to issue a joint statement expressing alarm over the developments and urge both sides to resume talks, two south-east Asian diplomats told the Associated Press.
The fighting has again threatened shipping traffic in the strait of Hormuz, the waterway where about 20% of global oil supplies transited before the war.
South-east Asia – a region of more than 680 million people – relies heavily on Middle East oil and gas and was severely hit by the global supply and price shocks sparked by the Iran war.
Police stand guard on Monday outside the convention centre in Metro Manila where the Asean talks will take place. 
 Photograph: Noel Celis/Reuters
Philippine president 
Ferdinand Marcos Jr
 declared a national energy emergency in March to ensure the availability of fuel, food and other basic goods and prevent hoarding and profiteering.
Washington’s preoccupation with the war in Iran and the diversion of its military firepower to the Middle East has sparked concerns over its focus on Asia-Pacific concerns, including China’s aggressive actions in the disputed South China Sea and against Taiwan.
US secretary of state 
Marco Rubio
, Chinese foreign minister 
Wang Yi
 and Russian foreign minister 
Sergey Lavrov
 are among those attending the talks.
Bahrain is again saying air raid warning sirens have sounded there – the 
third time
 it has issued the alert in about the past eight hours.
The interior ministry’s latest 
post on X
 again urged people to shelter in the nearest safe place.
The alert came as 
Iran
 has continued retaliatory strikes in the region after another round of US attacks.
Share
Updated at 
01.42 EDT
During the ninth night of US attacks on 
Iran
, the country’s state media has said explosions were reported in ⁠Tabriz, Chabahar, Konarak, Bandar Mahshahr and Bandar Imam Khomeini.
There was no immediate word from Iran on any casualties or damage from the attacks.
An attack on Tabriz, in north-west Iran, would mark a widening in US targets, which over recent days have largely been confined to the south and the area around the strait of Hormuz.
Kuwait’s army has said that the country’s air defences are actively “confronting attacks” from Iranian drones.
In a post on social media, the General Staff of the Army ordered citizens to “adhere to the security and safety instructions issued by the competent authorities.”
The statement comes soon after Iran’s Revolutionary Guards claimed to have hit US military targets in the country.
Rubio says other countries need to 'step up' to protect Hormuz strait shipping
The US secretary of state has said 
Iran
 is using the strait of Hormuz as leverage in the ongoing Middle East conflict and that 
other countries need to step up pressure to protect global shipping
.
“It’s clear that Iran – at least some people in Iran – want to control the straits and hold that as leverage against the world,” 
Marco Rubio
 told reporters ahead of travelling to the Philippines for a meeting of foreign ministers with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean).


double quotation mark
The United States will do and continue to do what it needs to, to protect global shipping, but other countries need to begin to step up and provide – whether it’s hardware or finances – to help carry that burden.


When asked if there was still a diplomatic solution to the escalating conflict, Rubio said, quoted by AFP:


double quotation mark
I think we’re always open to diplomacy. It has to be real. It has to be a deal that they’re willing to live by.


Iran attacks US military targets in Kuwait – reports
Iran’s Revolutionary Guard has reportedly said it hit US military targets in Kuwait
, with the Fars news agency cited as saying the Ali Al Salem air base was targeted.
The Kuwaiti army earlier said its air defences were responding to hostile drones from Iran.
The Islamic republic has continued launching strikes around the Gulf region in response to waves of US attacks as the two countries edge closer to a return to full-scale war after the collapse of their interim peace agreement signed last month.
Smoke billows over the town of Mangaf, south of Kuwait City, in footage posted on social media on Saturday. 
 Photograph: UGC/Unknown/AFP/Getty Images
Share
Updated at 
00.13 EDT
Bahrain has just said air raid sirens have sounded there again
.
The interior ministry 
urged people
 to stay calm and head to the nearest safe location.
About six hours earlier it said in another post on X that its alarm siren had been activated.
The alerts came as 
Iran
 has continued to retaliate against US strikes by targeting US-allied countries around the Middle East.
Share
Updated at 
23.43 EDT
The latest US-Iran hostilities come as the two countries have inched closer to all-out war
 since last month’s interim deal meant to permanently end the fighting has crumbled and shipping traffic in the strait of Hormuz has largely stalled.
Explosions at an unknown location during what the US military said were strikes against Iran on Sunday. 
 Photograph: US Central Command/Reuters
Iran has continued to retaliate against US strikes by hitting American-allied countries throughout the 
Middle East
, with sirens heard in 
Bahrain
 early on Monday and 
Kuwait
 army later saying its air defences were responding to hostile drones from Iran.
Iran’s Revolutionary Guard
s also claimed to have launched a “surprise attack” on an enemy command centre in the Al-Tanf region of 
Syria
, in a statement reported by Iranian state news agency Irna.
After Iran targeted sites in 
Jordan
 on Sunday, 
Israel
 warned of the danger of
 the strikes spilling across its borders, reigniting a direct regional conflict that had been restrained even as tensions between the 
Trump administration
 and Iran have soared again.
“If Iran fires missiles at 
Israel
, we will attack them with full force,” Israeli defence minister 
Israel Katz
 said on Sunday.
The US is expected to send dozens of additional refuelling planes to Israel as part of a reinforcement of its force posture in the region, a US official told Reuters.
There’s more in our latest full report:
Oil prices surge amid latest US-Iran hostilities
The price of oil jumped in early Asian trade on Monday
 after the US carried out its latest wave of strikes on 
Iran
 and a vessel caught fire in the strait of Hormuz.
Brent crud
e for September delivery rose 2.72% to $90.50 a barrel by around 0100 GMT, after briefly crossing $91 – its highest price since June.
The US benchmark 
West Texas Intermediate
 gained 2.39% to $84.46, Agence France-Presse reports.
The gains reflected growing fears that renewed fighting in the Middle East could disrupt oil shipments through the Hormuz strait, a critical corridor for global energy supplies.
Share
Updated at 
22.52 EDT
US says it has completed latest wave of attacks
The US military’s Central Command says it has “successfully completed” its ninth consecutive evening of strikes against Iran
.
It said in a post on X:


double quotation mark
CENTCOM assets targeted Iranian military command centers, air defense and coastal surveillance sites, maritime capabilities, missile and drone launch sites, and communications networks to further diminish Iran’s ability to attack commercial vessels and civilian mariners transiting the Strait of Hormuz.


The U.S. military is holding Iran accountable at the Commander in Chief’s direction.


Iran vows not 'a single drop' of oil or gas will transit Hormuz strait if US 'aggression' continues
Iran’s Revolutionary Guard says it has targeted US aircraft in Jordan’s Aqaba airport with ballistic missiles
.
It also claimed on Monday that two oil tankers ⁠had exploded ⁠and been immobilised ​after attempting to transit what it ⁠described as an unsafe southern route through the strait ⁠of Hormuz, alleging they had been ​encouraged ‌by the ‌US military to use the passage.
The statement from the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps gave no details on the vessels’ names, flags, crews or any ‌casualties, Reuters reports, saying it could not immediately verify the incident.
The Guard said the strait would remain unsafe ​as long as what it called US “aggression” in the region continued, warning that “this passage will ⁠not be safe for the ​transit ​of petrochemical products, ​nor even a single ​drop ‌of oil ​and ​gas”.
It also warned the US military to prepare for a “punitive operation”.
Share
Updated at 
22.37 EDT
Vessel on fire in strait of Hormuz, maritime agency says
A vessel is on fire in the Hormuz strait off Oman
, the UK’s Maritime Trade Operations agency is saying, citing military authorities.
It said it received a report of an incident eight nautical miles north-west of Kumzar in Oman’s far north – on the southern edge of the strait.
The cause of the fire had not yet been verified, the agency 
posted on X
, advising vessels to “transit with caution”.
Share
Updated at 
21.23 EDT
Trump says US hitting Iran 'very hard'
More now on 
Donald Trump saying the latest US strikes on 
Iran
 were being carried out in honour of US service members killed in recent days
.
“We hit them very hard again tonight, and we did that in honour of the probably three, it’s probably three great patriots,” Trump told reporters as he returned to Washington after the World Cup final.
The US president said “we feel very badly” when asked about the military fatalities, adding that those who died were fighting so that “Iran cannot have a nuclear weapon”, in comments cited by the AFP news agency.
As mentioned, one American service member was killed in Iraq during the “controlled detonation” of a downed Iranian drone on Saturday and two were killed in Jordan in an Iranian attack on Friday, according to the US military.
Trump says US hitting Iran 'very hard'
Donald Trump is saying the US is hitting 
Iran
 “very hard”
 to honour the American service members who have been killed in recent days.
We’ll bring you more on his reported comments soon.
Share
Updated at 
20.48 EDT
Kuwait
’s army said earlier that its air defences were responding to hostile drones from 
Iran
, while in 
Bahrain
 the interior ministry also said earlier that air raid sirens had sounded there.
Tehran has previously retaliated against US attacks with strikes at American-allied countries around the Middle East.
Share
Updated at 
20.46 EDT
The Israeli military says sirens 
sounded a short time ago in the southern Israeli areas
 
of Kfar Aza and Sa’ad
 but it had been determined to be from a 
“false identification”
.
The IDF posted the announcement on Telegram.
The ⁠United Kingdom Maritime ⁠Trade Operations ⁠agency said ​it had received ⁠a report of ⁠an ​incident ‌8 nautical miles (14.8 ‌km) north-west ‌of Oman’s Kumzar, where information from a verified ‌source 
indicated that ​a vessel was on fire
.
UKMTO, cited by Reuters, ⁠said the cause ​of the ​fire ​had ​not ‌been ​verified.
Opening summary: US says it is launching ninth night of strikes on Iran
Hello and welcome to our live coverage of developments in the Middle East.
The 
US military
 says it is beginning its ninth night of strikes on 
Iran
, with an interim deal aimed at ending the war appearing to have all but collapsed.
“The strikes will continue degrading Iranian military capabilities used to attack commercial vessels and civilian mariners transiting the
 strait of Hormuz
,” 
US Central Command
 said on X on Sunday.
The attacks on Sunday come after a US service member was killed in 
Iraq
 the previous day during a “controlled detonation” of a downed Iranian drone, according to the US military, and two American troops were killed in 
Jordan
 on Friday.
An Iranian bridge linking Bandar Abbas and Kehuristan is seen on Sunday in Iran’s Hormozgan province after US strikes. Iranian authorities said the US carried out attacks on 95 locations across 12 cities over the previous 10 days. 
 Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images
The US military said carried out strikes against Iran on Saturday to “swiftly punish” the country’s 
Revolutionary Guard
 for the Jordan attack, while Iranian supreme leader Ayatollah Mojtaba Khamenei said the US would pay for trying to “escalate” the conflict.
In other key developments:




Bahrain’s interior ministry said overnight to Monday that its air raid sirens had sounded
. “Citizens and residents are urged to remain calm and head to the nearest safe place,” it said on X. Bahrain, host of the US Fifth Fleet, has been targeted by Iranian strikes in recent days.




Iran’s Revolutionary Guards said Monday it launched a “surprise attack” on an enemy command centre in Syria
, in a statement reported by state news agency Irna. They attack was “in revenge for the blood of martyred soldiers of Iranshahr”, a city in south-east Iran, Irna said on Telegram.




Iran said it targeted two US bases in Kuwait in response to more than a week of intensifying attacks
, which Tehran says have hit transport and infrastructure sites, including an under-construction nuclear power plant.




Kuwait and Bahrain have borne the brunt of attacks by Iran
 on its Gulf neighbours since hostilities resumed this month despite a ceasefire and memorandum of understanding between Washington and Tehran.




Jordan also reported intercepting missiles
, a day after the US military said the two service members were killed there Friday and another had gone missing in action as they “defended against Iranian ballistic missile and drone attacks”.




US Central Command’s announcement that a service member died in northern Iraq during the controlled detonation of an unexploded ordnance from a downed Iranian drone 
brought to 17 the confirmed number of American military fatalities since the war began
. Iran’s health ministry said on ‌Saturday that 
50 people had been killed
 ​and more than 500 injured in US strikes ​on the country over the past three weeks.


Share
Updated at 
20.11 EDT