Beirut, 29 May 2026


This Eid al-Adha, normally a time of reflection and family celebrations, civilians across Lebanon faced an appalling escalation of violence, displacement, and human loss.


I am deeply alarmed by the intensification of hostilities and by the impact of displacement orders affecting communities across Lebanon, including in Tyre, Nabatieh, and other locations south of the Zahrani River.


The vast scale and unclarity of displacement orders are creating disproportionate panic and distress, pushing countless families to make impossible choices in their search for safety.


There have been shocking reports that airstrikes have harmed civilians as they attempted to leave areas under displacement orders. Ongoing hostilities have reportedly hindered efforts by first responders to assist the injured, including people trapped under rubble in the aftermath of Israeli airstrikes.


The human costs are immense. According to the Ministry of Public Health, at least 31 people including women and children were killed and 40 injured in hostilities on 26 May alone. This includes 14 people who were reportedly killed in a single airstrike in Borj El Chmali near the city of Tyre. In the past week, 15 children have been killed and 62 injured.


Health workers are facing death and injury on a horrific scale. Since 2 March, 182 attacks have resulted in 125 health care personnel killed and 311 injured, according to the WHO surveillance system for attacks on health care (‎SSA).


International humanitarian law is clear. The protection of civilians, including health workers and first responders, must be ensured.


The ceasefire announcement raised hopes for a return to normal life. However, instead of families going home, the displacement of civilians continues unabated.


Men, women, and children continue to flee their homes for safety. Shelters are now overflowing. Schools continue to be displacement sites, robbing children from their right to education.


It is distressing to see the unique historical heritage of Lebanon, including Tyre, a UNESCO World Heritage Site and a site inscribed under enhanced protection, being threatened by the hostilities.


One week ago, I was in Tyre meeting with displaced people in a collective shelter. Some families told me they had been forced to move five times in the last two years.


Their wishes were crystal clear: de-escalation, a true stop to hostilities, the possibility of rebuilding their lives, and hope for the futures of their children.