Gas prices and insecurity worsen food access in Haiti 
Key Messages 
This report provides an update to the February to September 2026 
Food Security Outlook and March 2026 Key Message Update. The analysis is based on information available as of 
April 15, 2026. 
Haiti - Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026 
From April to September 2026, most of the country is 
expected to remain in Crisis (IPC Phase 3). Certain 
communes in the Port-au-Prince Metropolitan Area (ZMPP), 
particularly Cité Soleil and Croix-des-Bouquets, are expected 
to face Emergency (IPC Phase 4) outcomes, with internally 
displaced persons (IDPs) especially affected. Pockets of 
households in Emergency (IPC Phase 4) are also expected in 
Artibonite, Centre, and some communes in the Nord-Ouest. 
These households, highly exposed to one or more forms of 
violence, deteriorating purchasing power, or rainfall 
irregularities, will continue to rely on negative coping strategies 
and face significant food consumption deficits. 
Rising global oil prices linked to tensions in the Middle East 
forced the Haitian government to increase domestic fuel 
prices (29 percent for gasoline and 37 percent for diesel). The 
increase has driven up transportation and distribution costs by 
more than 50 percent on some routes, intensifying pressure on 
already high food prices, even though overall inflation declined 
from 25 percent in December 2025 to 22.1 percent in February 
2026, according to the Haitian Institute of Statistics and 
Informatics (IHSI). 
Insecurity continues to disrupt markets and livelihoods. The 
continued control of road corridors by gangs is increasing 
transaction costs, disrupting trade flows, and limiting 
households’ access — especially displaced and poor urban 
households — to markets and income-earning opportunities, 
particularly in the Port-au-Prince Metropolitan Area, Artibonite, 
and Centre. 
Agricultural performance is expected to remain below 
average due to constrained access to inputs (seeds, labor) and 
land. Despite a limited seasonal improvement in food availability 
expected from June onward with the spring harvests, it will likely 
be insufficient to offset the combined effects of insecurity, rising 
production costs, and weak incomes, thereby maintaining high 
levels of food insecurity across the country. 
FEWS NET is a United States Government-funded activity. The content of this report does not
necessarily reflect the view of the United States Government.
FEWS NET Haiti
haiti@fews.net
fews.net/latin-america-and-caribbean/haiti
Current anomalies in food security conditions as of April 2026 
Insecurity remains one of the main drivers of food insecurity in 
Haiti (Figure 1), particularly in the ZMPP, Lower Artibonite, and 
Centre. Despite ongoing security operations and the deployment of 
anti-gang forces, gangs continue to maintain and expand their 
control over strategic routes, especially National Road 1 (RN1), 
imposing movement restrictions, illegal payments, and heightened 
risks for transporters. 
Recent attacks confirm a worsening of violence, particularly in 
Centre and Artibonite. Incidents in Jean-Denis, Pont Sondé, and 
Pont Benoît, which caused around 70 civilian deaths and dozens of 
injuries, illustrate an intensification of violence, accompanied by 
new displacement waves and greater disruption of livelihoods. 
The geographic expansion of armed gangs is spreading into 
new areas, including strategic agricultural zones, with 
incursions reported in the Sud-Est (Seguin and Marigot). This 
dynamic reflects a strategy aimed at strengthening control over 
secondary roads and production basins, further constraining 
economic and agricultural activities. 
The entrenchment of a conflict economy is reinforcing constraints on market access and livelihoods. Gang control 
over trade routes and production zones continues to be a key driver of acute food insecurity, while the recent 
increase in fuel prices is expected to further raise transport costs and potentially informal road tolls, worsening 
market access difficulties and worsening food security conditions. 
The number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) remains extremely high (more than 1.45 million), with 
particularly precarious living conditions in displacement sites. Pressure on host households in rural areas is 
increasing nutritional risks, especially for children. According to the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM), a new wave of displacement involving approximately 5,291 people (1,359 households) was recorded in 
Artibonite following violence at the end of March. Among these households, 81 percent were hosted by 
families, while 19 percent settled in displacement sites, further straining already limited resources. Around 
52 percent of displaced persons are concentrated in Dessalines commune, intensifying pressure on basic 
services, local markets, and rural food systems. 
Market function remains generally active but highly disrupted. Tensions in the Middle East contributed to rising 
international oil prices, leading to increases in domestic fuel prices on April 2 (37 percent for diesel and 29 
percent for gasoline). Trade flows remain irregular due to armed control of key corridors (RN1, RN2, RN3) and 
high transportation costs for food commodities. This dynamic has also resulted in a significant increase in public 
transportation costs. Thus, despite slowing overall inflation (22.1 percent in February 2026), food prices remain far 
above the five-year average, severely limiting poor households’ access to food. 
Poor household incomes remain below average, both in nominal terms and due to the high prices of goods and 
services. In urban areas, informal activities (small trade, daily labor) are heavily affected by insecurity. In rural areas, 
declining agricultural incomes, combined with high input costs and limited market access, are maintaining strong 
market dependence in a context of continuously deteriorating purchasing power and annual inflation above 20 
percent. 
Figure 1 
Factors limiting food access in Haiti 
(April 2026) 
Source: FEWS NET 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 2
Humanitarian food assistance 
The 2026 Humanitarian Response Plan, targeting around 4.2 million people with a budget of 880 million USD, 
remains severely underfunded, particularly since the beginning of the year. Assistance continues to be irregular and 
provided for only short time periods, while the value of transfers or food rations remains below monthly food needs. 
These factors hinder the ability of humanitarian actors to scale up and regularize assistance, while also limiting the 
impacts on food consumption gaps due to rising prices. 
According to reports from UNICEF and humanitarian partners, the nutrition response remains constrained, with 
increasing needs among children under five and insufficient coverage of screening and treatment services. In this 
context, food and nutrition assistance continues to have only a limited impact in mitigating food security outcomes, 
particularly in areas most affected by insecurity and internal displacement. Major actors, especially the WFP and its 
partners, continue to provide assistance through food distributions, hot meals, and cash/voucher transfers. However, 
interventions remain targeted and sporadic and are still largely insufficient given the millions of people facing acute 
food insecurity. 
Updates to key assumptions about atypical food security conditions through September 2026 
Most of the assumptions that underpinned FEWS NET’s analysis of the most likely scenario for the Haiti Food 
Security Outlook from February to September 2026 remain valid; however, the following updates have been made 
to incorporate new evidence: 
Projected acute food insecurity outcomes through September 2026 
From April to September 2026, most of the country is expected to remain in Crisis (IPC Phase 3). Certain 
communes in the ZMPP, particularly Cité Soleil and Croix-des-Bouquets, are expected to be classified in 
Emergency (IPC Phase 4). In addition, households living in IDP sites within the ZMPP are also expected to face 
Emergency outcomes. Outside the ZMPP, pockets of households in Emergency (IPC Phase 4) are expected in 
Artibonite, Centre, and some communes in the Nord-Ouest. 
According to U.S. Geological Survey forecasts, rainfall during the first rainy season (April-June) is expected to be 
generally near average. However, rainfall is expected to gradually decline, becoming below average toward the 
end of June. For the autumn agricultural season, below-average rainfall combined with above-average 
temperatures are expected to slow planting, crop growth, and development, resulting in lower yields. 
Food prices are expected to face upward pressure due to the ongoing energy shock. Rising international 
oil prices driven by tensions in the Middle East are expected to increase domestic fuel prices, further raising 
transportation and distribution costs and, consequently, food prices, despite the slowdown in overall inflation. 
The relative stability of imported food prices is becoming less likely to persist. Although supplies of 
imported staple products (rice, wheat flour, vegetable oil) are expected to remain generally stable, prices are 
increasingly exposed to external shocks, particularly through transport, insurance, and distribution costs. The 
transmission of the fuel price shock is expected to keep prices of both imported and locally produced foods 
above the five-year average, with additional pressure during the lean season. 
The direct impact of rising fertilizer prices remains limited at the national level but significant for 
certain agricultural systems. Fertilizer use in Haiti remains very low (around 3.8 kilograms/hectare) compared 
with the Latin America and Caribbean average (approximately 100 kilograms/hectare), which limits the direct 
impact of price increases at the national level. However, these increases are expected to more significantly 
affect irrigated areas and peri-urban farming systems where input use is higher. In these areas, rising fertilizer 
costs could reduce input use, increase production costs, and limit yields, contributing to below-average 
agricultural performance. 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 3
During the lean season (April-May), dependence on markets is expected to remain high across the country. Rising 
international oil prices have increased transportation and distribution costs, sustaining higher food prices and 
further reducing the purchasing power of poor households. In this context, poor households are expected to 
continue relying on negative coping strategies such as begging, engaging in illegal and/or precarious activities, and 
selling productive assets, including seed stocks, among others. Global acute malnutrition is expected to reach its 
seasonal peak between April and May at above-normal levels, particularly in the ZMPP, Artibonite, and Centre, with 
a parallel increase in mortality risk. Populations in areas most affected by displacement and insecurity are likely to 
face the highest risk of malnutrition. 
From June through September 2026, a partial seasonal improvement is expected with the spring harvests, 
temporarily supporting food availability and agricultural incomes. However, this improvement is expected to remain 
limited due to constraints on access to inputs, insecurity, and rainfall variability. As a result, most areas are expected 
to remain in Crisis (IPC Phase 3), while Emergency (IPC Phase 4) outcomes are expected to persist in the ZMPP and 
in some areas under strong armed group influence. Food consumption is expected to improve temporarily without 
allowing for meaningful livelihood recovery, and malnutrition is expected to remain above normal, especially in areas 
with high concentrations of displaced populations. 
ZMPP: Very poor urban households and IDPs are expected to continue facing significant food consumption 
deficits due to persistent violence, restricted access to markets and income-generating activities, and rising transport 
and food costs. Certain communes, particularly Cité Soleil and Croix-des-Bouquets, are expected to remain in 
Emergency (IPC Phase 4), with increased reliance on negative coping strategies. 
Lower Artibonite and Centre corridors: In these areas affected by the spread of insecurity, disruptions to markets, 
agricultural activities, and trade flows are expected to keep most households in Crisis (IPC Phase 3). Pockets of 
households in Emergency (IPC Phase 4) are expected to persist, particularly in isolated areas or those recently 
affected by displacement, where access to income and markets remains severely restricted. 
Grand Sud: Despite relatively lower levels of insecurity, poor households are expected to remain in Crisis (IPC Phase 
3) due to weak agricultural and non-agricultural incomes and high food prices. The combined effects of elevated 
transportation costs and below-average agricultural performance are expected to limit significant improvements in 
food consumption. 
Nord-Ouest: In some communes of the Nord-Ouest, households are expected to continue facing structural 
constraints to food access linked to weak agricultural production, limited income-earning opportunities, and high 
prices, maintaining Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes, with some pockets of households facing even more difficult 
living conditions. 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 4
Annex 1: Updates to events that would likely change projected acute food insecurity outcomes 
While FEWS NET’s projections are considered the “most likely” scenario, there is always a degree of uncertainty in the 
assumptions that underpin the scenario. This means food security conditions and their impacts on acute food security may 
evolve differently than projected. FEWS NET issues monthly updates to its projections, but decision makers need advance 
information about this uncertainty and an explanation of why things may turn out differently than projected. As such, the 
final step in FEWS NET’s scenario development process is to briefly identify key events that would result in a credible 
alternative scenario and significantly change the projected outcomes. FEWS NET only considers scenarios that have a 
reasonable chance of occurrence. 
National 
Escalation of conflict in the Middle East 
Likely impact on acute food insecurity outcomes: A worsening of the conflict in the Middle East, in the absence of 
an agreement between the parties, could lead to a prolonged and more volatile increase in international oil prices. 
Haiti is highly dependent on fuel imports, and escalating conflict would increase the likelihood of further domestic 
fuel price hikes beyond the recent adjustments, with cumulative effects on transportation and distribution costs. 
This dynamic would exert sustained inflationary pressure on food prices, particularly in areas highly dependent on 
markets. The continued rise in logistical costs, combined with internal security constraints, would further disrupt 
trade flows and increasingly limit the regular supply of markets. 
In addition, the prolonged increase in agricultural input costs (fertilizer, transport) could reduce cultivated areas and 
crop yields, undermining not only the spring agricultural season but also medium-term agricultural prospects. Since 
the government’s capacity to mitigate these shocks through subsidies is limited, a growing share of the costs would 
transmit to consumers. 
Under this scenario, the purchasing power of poor households — particularly urban households, displaced 
populations, and households in isolated areas — would continue to deteriorate, leading to worsening food 
consumption deficits. This could result in an increase in the number of households facing Emergency (IPC Phase 4) 
outcomes and a geographic expansion of affected areas, particularly in the ZMPP, Artibonite, Centre, and parts of the 
Grand Sud. 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 5
Annex 2: Updates to key sources of evidence used in this analysis 
Many of the key sources of evidence utilized for FEWS NET’s February to September 2026 Food Security Outlook 
remain the same; however, new and additional sources of evidence are listed below. 
Evidence  Source Data format Food security element of analysis 
Climate condition models NOAA Qualitative 
and 
quantitative 
ENSO probabilities, rainfall, and 
sea surface temperatures 
Monetary policy note, October–December 2025 BRH Qualitative 
and 
quantitative 
Inflation, exchange rates, money 
supply, and their impacts on 
purchasing power and food 
prices 
Haiti — Emergency Tracking 88.2 — Update on 
displacement related to armed attacks in Petite 
Rivière de l’Artibonite and Dessalines (March 28 – 
April 6, 2026) 
IOM Qualitative 
and 
quantitative 
Number of IDPs, causes of 
displacement, areas of 
concentration, and impacts on 
livelihoods and food access 
Consumer Price Index (CPI) IHSI Quantitatives Information on inflation rates for 
food and non-food products, 
including local and imported 
goods 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 6
Annex 3: Seasonal calendar 
Recommended citation: FEWS NET. Haiti Food Security Outlook Update 
April - September 2026: Gas prices and insecurity worsen food access in 
Haiti, 2026. 
Food Security Outlook Update 
This Food Security Outlook Update provides an analysis of current acute food insecurity conditions and any changes to FEWS NET's latest projection of acute food insecurity outcomes 
in the specified geography over the next six months. Learn more here. 
Source: FEWS NET 
* FEWS NET classification is IPC-compatible with limited exceptions. IPC-compatible analysis follows key IPC protocols but does not necessarily reflect the consensus of national food security 
partners. As of IPC 3.0, the IPC no longer assesses the impact of food assistance on classification and thus no longer maps the (!). However, FEWS NET continues to produce food security 
maps inclusive of the (!) as well as maps compatible with IPC 3.0/3.1, which include the mapping of food security assistance bags. In rare cases, FEWS NET classification is IPC-aligned but 
not IPC-compatible. IPC-aligned analysis is evidence-based but some types of evidence required for IPC-compatibility were not available. 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 7