The mission of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) is to coordinate the global emergency response to save 
lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. We advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for all. 
www.unocha.org 
 
This report is produced by the OCHA Lebanon Office in collaboration with the Inter-Sector Coordination Group under the 2026 Lebanon 
Response Plan (LRP) Framework 
KEY FIGURES 
HIGHLIGHTS        
● Revised Flash Appeal jointly launched by the United Nations 
and Government of Lebanon on 5 June, calling for US$ 639.9 
million to assist 1.4 million people through August 2026. 
● Hostilities continued with airstrikes and six new displacement 
orders covering 14 localities across the South and Nabatieh 
governorates triggering additional displacements. 
● At least 3, 526 deaths and 10, 733 injuries due to hostilities  
recorded by the Ministry of Public Health since 2 March. 
● 196 attacks on healthcare recorded by WHO since 2 March , 
resulting in 131 deaths and 379 injuries among on-duty 
healthcare workers. 
● Over 12.4 million hot and cold meals distributed by Food 
Security and Agriculture sector partners since 2 March.  
● 652 vulnerable families have received cash-based assistance 
of $250 from Shelter Sector partners to cover shelter-related 
costs since 15 May. 
● Pipeline and service breaks due to f unding gaps expected 
from 1 July in WASH, Health  and Food Security and 
Agriculture sectors. 
SITUATION OVERVIEW 
Despite the new ceasefire announcement jointly issued by Lebanon, Israel and the United States on 3 June, the situation 
remained volatile during the reporting period  as Hezbollah rejected the ceasefire’s terms. Hostilities continued unabated, 
spurring new population movements and mounting humanitarian needs. At least six displacement orders were issued or 
renewed by the Israeli Army for parts of South and Nabatieh Governorates, including calls for the entire civilian population 
to move north of the Zahrani River, triggering additional population movements  and placing increased pressure on 
already overstretched shelters and host communities. 
As 4 June 135,300 people – or around 35,500 families – were registered in 636 increasingly-overcrowded collective 
shelters, with thousands more families sheltering in open spaces. Collective shelters in Tyre and Saida in South 
governorate were reportedly full.  
     
Self-registered 
(IDPs) 
Displaced in 
collective shelters Shelters People killed People injured 
1M 
 
(MOSA) 
135.3K  
 
(DRM) 
636 
 
(DRM) 
3.5K  
 
(MOPH) 
10.7K  
 
(MOPH) 
 
 
 
 
Lebanon: Flash Update #32 
Escalation of Hostilities in Lebanon 
As of 04 June 2026
Lebanon Flash Update No. 32 | 2 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
According to the Ministry of Public Health (MoPH), at least 3,526 people have been killed (including 339 women and 245 
children) and 10,733 injured (including 1,337 women and 957 children) due to hostilities since 2 March 2026. UNIFIL, the 
UN peacekeeping operations in southern Lebanon, reported the death of a peacekeeper and two injur ies occurred on 4 
June in Marjaayoun, when their position came under shelling. Seven UN peacekeepers have been killed in Lebanon since 
2 March. 
Threats and attacks against healthcare continued to be reported : at least 196 attacks affecting healthcare have been 
recorded, and 131 on -duty healthcare workers killed and 379 injured, between 2 March and 4 June 2026. An attack on 2 
June near Tebnine Governmental Hospital in Nabatieh Governorate – the only operational health facility in Bint Jbeil district 
and a critical hub for trauma care in southern Lebanon – wounded 11 people, including a doctor and five hospital staff, and 
caused damage to the facility. This incident constitutes the fourth  impacting the hospital since the escalation of hostilities 
on 2 March, raising grave concerns over the protection of health care professionals and services. On 3 June and in response 
to an allegation posted by the IDF, Tebnine Hospital’s administration issued a statement defending its continuous provision 
of healthcare and medical services throughout the conflict, despite the challenges and risks faced by its medical, nursing, 
administrative and support staff . According to the hospital’s statement, more than 70 nursing, administrative and support 
staff and 10 doctors have continued to perform their duties and provide care within the hospita l, supported by a n ICRC 
team.  
Protection risks affecting the civilian population  remain significant. Displaced families shared their feelings of  heightened 
psychosocial stress  during visits, particularly among children exposed to recurrent displacement. Risks related to 
unexploded ordnance (UXO) and movement in previously affected areas continue to pose threats, limiting safe return and 
access to agricultural land. 
Overall, the situation  continues to be  characterized by persistent fragility, with humanitarian needs outpac ing available 
resources. Pipeline and service breaks due to f unding gaps are expected in the WASH, Health, and Food Security and 
Agriculture sectors from 1 July.  Economic conditions continue to deteriorate, further exacerbating vulnerabilities. 
Communities reported rising prices of rent and essential goods, increasing reliance on humanitarian assistance.  
On 5 June 2026, the revised Flash Appeal  was jointly launched by  the Humanitarian Coordinator for Lebanon and the 
Minister of Social Affairs (the Government’s lead on  coordination of and response to the humanitarian crisis resulting from 
the escalation of hostilities), under the patronage of the Lebanese Prime Minister. The revised appeal seeks an additional 
US$ 331.5 million to sustain and expand multi -sector assistance for up to  1.4 million people in need  through the end of 
August 2026. The revised appeal reflects the growing scale and severity of humanitarian needs and brings the total funding 
requirement for the six months’ response from March through August 2026 to US$ 639.9 million. At the time of its 
publication, the revised Flash Appeal was 29 per cent funded, with $190 million in contributions reported to date. 
At the launch event, Humanitarian Coordinator Imran Riza called for de-escalation, respect for International Humanitarian 
Law, unhindered humanitarian access, and scaled -up funding , noting that  “the people of Lebanon have developed a 
remarkable strength to withstand the hardest of times, but even this exceptional resilience has its limits .”  
HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE 
Humanitarian response in Lebanon remains large  scale but strained. Emergency multi-purpose cash assistance targets 
around 100,000 households, while food support has delivered over 12.4 million meals, though most shelters still receive 
only one daily meal. Education partners reach over 267,000 displaced children through mixed modalities despite li mited 
school access. Nutrition interventions cover more than 553,000 vulnerable individuals, while protection services assist 
nearly 245,000 people with psychosocial support and cash grants. WASH services reach over one million people, though 
infrastructure gaps persist. Shelter upgrades and relief distributions continue widely. Overall, funding shortfalls, insecurity, 
and access constraints are limiting the scale, sustainability, and equity of aid delivery.  
 Multi-Purpose Cash Assistance (MPCA) 
The Cash Working Group (CWG) maintains close collaboration with implementing partners and Government counterparts 
to ensure a well-coordinated and inclusive response. While most markets across areas of operation continue to function, 
persistent affordability challenges and eroding household purchasing power are increasingly undermining the ability of 
vulnerable populations to meet their basic ne eds. One of the most pressing MPCA priorities remains the mobilisation of 
additional financial resources. Data cleaning processes are ongoing, and the targeting approach is scheduled to commence 
as of 9 June to disburse the second and third cash payments for the most vulnerable conflict -affected populations. 
The Ministry of Social Affairs (MoSA) has shared beneficiary lists for the emergency multi-purpose cash assistance ( E-
MPCA) with CWG partners , covering approximately 100,000 households to be assisted  under Batch C of a blanket E -
Lebanon Flash Update No. 32 | 3 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
MPCA distribution. The subsequent E -MPCA cycle will transition to prioritised lists based on specific vulnerability criteria, 
ensuring a targeted and equitable focus. 
 Education 
Since the onset of the crisis, Education Sector partners have reached 262,384 displaced children  through formal 
education modalities (94,073 in-person and 163,420 online) and 4,891 children through non -formal education activities. In 
addition, 1,604 children received individual learning materials, 88 children with disabilities received assistive devi ces or 
rehabilitation services, and 1,897 education kits were distributed at shelter level to support learning continuity.  
A total of 446 public schools and training centres continue to serve as collective shelters, suspending their educational 
function and limiting access to safe learning spaces for displaced children. Overcrowding, connectivity challenges, lack of 
devices, a nd heightened protection risks continue to undermine children’s ability to access and engage in learning. 
Adolescent girls, children with disabilities, and afternoon -shift students remain among the most vulnerable groups. In 
response, and following Government approval, Education Sector partners are delivering a set of services within collective 
shelters that include structured learning activities, psychosocial support, recreational activities, social -emotional learning, 
and retention support directly. 
Significant challenges persist. Space constraints in shelters, lengthy approval processes, and connectivity barriers continue 
to limit the scale and timeliness of education interventions. Findings from the Emergency Rapid Needs Assessment (ERNA) 
indicate that 61 per cent of respondents identified internet access as a key barrier to learning. Concerns regarding official 
examinations remain prominent among children and families due to ongoing safety risks, stress, and mental health 
implications associated with displacement and insecurity. 
Looking ahead, the sector will prioritize expanding learning opportunities within shelters, establishing Teaching and 
Learning Hubs near shelter concentrations, and supporting summer catch -up programmes to mitigate learning loss and 
reduce dropout risks. The sector is also preparing to host an Education Cannot Wait scoping mission during the third week 
of June to support the launch of the Multi-Year Resilience Programme process and inform future investments in Education 
in Emergencies (EiE) in Lebanon. 
Sustained and flexible donor funding remains critical to expand access to safe, inclusive, and quality education for the most 
vulnerable children affected by the crisis. 
 Food Security and Agriculture 
Food Security and Agriculture (FSA) sector partners have distributed more than 12.4 million hot and cold meals , 
140,554 ready-to-eat (RTE) rations, and 126,300 bread bundles since 2 March. These distributions reached displaced 
families in collective shelters through in-kind assistance, as well as vulnerable households outside formal collective shelters 
through cash modalities. Such interventions remain critical in supporting households tha t have lost access to markets and 
livelihoods due to ongoing hostilities and displacement. 
Needs within collective shelters continue to increase, requiring food assistance to meet the minimum caloric intake. Due to 
reduced resources, approximately 80 per cent of shelters are currently providing only one hot meal per day  with additional 
RTE items distributed when available. However, partners lack the capacity to ensure regular weekly RTE distributions in 
line with recommended guidance. This represents a critical gap in both resources and operational capacity, which the sector 
is actively flagging to donors, as minimum food security requirements are not being met as of June 2026 for around 80 per 
cent of internally displaced persons (IDPs) across all shelters. 
Bread distribution activities are ongoing in close coordination with the Ministry of Economy and the Union of Bakeries. 
Through FSA partners, approximately 12,000 bread bundles are distributed daily across collective shelters.  
To address the needs of vulnerable populations outside collective shelters – particularly those not receiving cash assistance 
and residing in areas with limited market functionality  – food parcel distributions were initiated at the request of the 
Governors of Beirut and Mount Lebanon. Identified needs in Beirut total 25,000 parcels, fully covered through planned 
distributions FSA partners. Similarly, 30,000 parcels are planned to be distributed in the southern suburbs of Beirut. 
 
Health 
Attacks on health care continue despite the ceasefire and existing international protection frameworks, placing sustained 
pressure on an already fragile health system. The situation further escalated on 1 June, when an attack near Jabal Amel 
Hospital in Tyre caused significant structural damage, limiting health service delivery and injuring 39 health care workers. 
As one of only three major maternity hospitals in Tyre, the incident has significantly reduced access to life-saving maternal 
and newborn care, w ith seven hospitals now unable to resume vital maternity services. Consideration is being given to
Lebanon Flash Update No. 32 | 4 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
referrals to Saida (the South governorate) if conditions deteriorate further. A delivery that occurred just prior to the attack  
with both mother and newborn unharmed underscores the extreme vulnerability of maternity care. 
Since 2 March, a total of 196 attacks on health care have been recorded, resulting in 131 deaths and 379 injuries. Since 
the ceasefire announcement on 17 April, 50 attacks have affected health care professionals, facilities, transport, supplies, 
and patients, severely undermining system capacity and contributing to widespread psychological distress among both 
communities and health workers. 
 
Nutrition 
The Nutrition Sector is expanding its response in hard -to-reach areas by building the capacity of food security partners in 
13 villages in South Lebanon and Nabatieh to deliver the Essential Nutrition Package. This includes the provision of 
emergency nutrition supplies and services for children under five years of age and Pregnant and Lactating Women (PLW), 
helping ensure continued access to critical nutrition support in underserved communities.  
Since 2 March, nutrition assistance has reached children under five, adolescent girls, and PLWs with 553,468 
emergency nutrition rations and micronutrient supplements  for at least one month. This includes 843 children aged 
6–12 months in collective shelters receiving age-appropriate complementary feeding kits. In addition, 20,330 children under 
five and 4,215 P LW were screened for wasting, enabling early identification and referral of individuals requiring further 
nutrition support and treatment. 
The Nutrition Sector is expanding its response in hard -to-reach areas by building the capacity of food security partners in 
13 villages in South Lebanon and Nabatieh to deliver the Essential Nutrition Package. This includes the provision of 
emergency nutrition supplies and services for children under five years of age and Pregnant and Lactating Women (PLW), 
helping ensure continued access to critical nutrition support in underserved communities.  
The national Infant and Young Child Feeding (IYCF) hotline continues to serve as a critical support channel, receiving 656 
calls from caregivers between 1 and 4 June , with 514 callers referred for specialized IYCF support services. In addition, 
751 IYCF Simple Rapid Assessments were conducted to identify feeding challenges and inform appropriate support and 
referrals.  
In parallel, under the MoPH-led Safe Provision of Breastmilk Substitutes (BMS) initiative, 302 infants under one year of age 
received infant formula support following individual assessments conducted by Nutrition Sector partners’ IYCF specialists, 
resulting in the distribution of 3,049 cans of infant formula. Complementing this, 14,714 caregivers of children under five 
engaged in counselling and awareness sessions covering IYCF, nutrition, and Early Childhood Development  (ECD), 
delivered across both in-person and digital platforms. 
To support nurturing care and create safe spaces for caregivers and young children, 10 ECD and Mother -Baby Corners 
were established, providing integrated opportunities for caregiver support, responsive caregiving, early learning, and IYCF 
counselling. 
 Protection 
As of 4 June, 244,925 internally displaced people (IDPs) and other affected people received protection activities , 
of whom 62 per cent are women and girls . Services provided include information and awareness sessions for 120,936 
individuals; psychosocial support (PSS) activities for 81,231 individuals , primarily children and caregivers; and case 
management services for 1,540 individuals. In addition, 2,809 protection cash grants have supported approximately 9,733 
vulnerable individuals, while more than 29,638 women and girls have received dignity kits, i ncluding GBV awareness 
materials. Specialised support, including assistive devices and dedicated care, has also been provided to 1,625 persons 
with disabilities. 
The Emergency Task Force for Persons with Disabilities facilitated a five -hour frontline training on inclusive shelter and 
protection support. The training aimed to strengthen participants’ understanding of sector roles and responsibilities in 
delivering safe, inclusive and dignified protection services for persons with disabilities. A total of 40 frontline staff attended 
the session. However, significant gaps remain in specialised support, inclusive shelter, and access to dedicated care for 
persons with disabilities. 
Partners increasingly report the depletion of financial resources and the closure of projects, reducing sectoral capacity to 
respond to the growing number of protection, CP and GBV cases. Sector analysis indicates that, similar to the previous 
escalation in 2024, reported cases initially declined but began to increase again during the second quarter of the conflict.  
Key operational challenges persist, particularly the overstretched capacity of partners to adequately cover collective shelters 
and reach individuals residing outside official shelters, including those in open spaces. Monitoring missions continue to 
track evolving risks and trends and inform the scale -up of response efforts for newly displaced populations. Nonetheless, 
significant gaps remain in reaching populations outside collective sites and in hard -to-reach areas. Partners consistently
Lebanon Flash Update No. 32 | 5 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
link the lack of resources  – particularly for GBV, which remains severely underfunded  – to the limited availability of 
specialised services. Critical gaps persist in areas such as case management and mental health and psychosocial support 
(MHPSS), driven by insufficient funding and overstretched partner capacity.  
Recent attacks and displacement orders in the South-West Bekaa, the South, and Nabatieh governorates have resulted in 
significant displacement. While most displaced individuals are hosted within communities, this new influx has also 
necessitated the reopening of previously closed, school -based shelters. The continued arrival of newly displac ed persons 
intensifies existing pressures on collective sites, exacerbating overcrowding and resource shortages – factors consistently 
identified as key drivers of protection risks, including child protection (CP) and gender -based violence (GBV) concerns. In 
addition, partners in the South have reported increasing concerns related to child labour and the involvement of children in 
harmful coping mechanisms, such as street work and child marriage. 
 Shelter 
 Shelter Sector partners are prioritizing repairs and upgrades in 417 collective shelters , of which 337 have been 
completed. Response activities focus on improving safety, increasing capacity, and enhancing privacy for displaced 
populations across Lebanon. 
Since 2 March, Shelter Sector partners have supported 45,427 households —both inside and outside collective 
shelters—through the distribution of 135,723 mattresses, 175,790 blankets and 87,889 pillows, alongside other essential 
non-food items (NFIs), including sleeping mats, solar lamps and jerrycans.  
Shelter Sector partners are prioritizing repairs and upgrades in 417 collective shelters, of which 337 have been completed. 
Response activities focus on improving safety, increasing capacity, and enhancing privacy for displaced populations across 
Lebanon. 
Within collective shelters, distributions have included 108,946 mattresses, 136,646 blankets and 72,037 pillows, in addition 
to complementary items aimed at ensuring dignified living conditions. Initial core relief item (CRI) distributions have reached 
all households in collective shelters, while the identification and registration of new arrivals are being managed through 
established referral mechanisms. 
Outside collective shelters, assistance is being provided on a case-by-case basis, with 26,777 mattresses, 39,144 blankets 
and 15,852 pillows distributed to vulnerable households. 
As most displaced households are residing in hosted or rented accommodation outside collective shelters, the sector has 
also provided one-off shelter cash assistance  of US$250 per household to 652 vulnerable families. This support aims to 
help cover essential shelter -related costs during displacement, including minor maintenance, basic repairs and essential 
utility payments. 
 
Site Management and Coordination 
With displacement levels continuing to rise and collective shelter sites operating at or beyond capacity, the Ministry of Social 
Affairs (MoSA) continues to lead site management efforts, with support from the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM). 
As part of ongoing efforts to scale up the sub -sector coordination structure, enhance partner representation, and promote 
transparency, the Site Management Coordination (SMC) sub-sector launched an Expression of Interest (EOI) for the NGO 
co-coordinator ro le. The selection process is expected to be finalized within two weeks. The NGO co -coordinator will 
complement MoSA’s leadership by providing technical support, including contributing to the review and strengthening of 
the SMC strategy and key response tools. 
Amid continued escalation and displacement, which are placing increasing pressure on collective sites, the SMC sub-sector 
is scaling up its response, aiming to support approximately 80,000 individuals across 400 sites, subject to the availability of 
funding. This will be achieved through the deployment of mobile site management support teams to strengthen government-
led on-site coordination mechanisms and improve site management structures.  
To ensure a more holistic, efficient and coordinated response, the SMC sub-sector is actively coordinating with the Shelter, 
WASH, Education and Protection sectors to align on cross-cutting priorities, including the repair of collective sites, site care 
and maintenance, protection mainstreaming and site decommissioning. This intersectoral approach aims to enhance 
service delivery, optimize resource allocation, and ensure that site transitions are conducted in a safe, dignified and well -
coordinated manner.
Lebanon Flash Update No. 32 | 6 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
  
Social Stability 
Social Stability partners, in close coordination with the Lebanese Mine Action Center (LMAC), delivered 26 Explosive 
Ordnance Risk Education (EORE) sessions targeting internally displaced persons (IDPs) residing in collective shelters. 
These sessions aimed  to raise awareness of the risks posed by landmines, unexploded ordnance (UXO), and other 
explosive remnants of war, equipping affected populations with essential knowledge to reduce exposure to life -threatening 
hazards. The activities were conducted acros s Beirut Governorate, as well as in the Zahle and West Bekaa districts in the 
Bekaa Governorate. 
 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
As of 4 June, the WASH Sector has reached 1,068,093 people across collective shelters, host communities, and out-of-
shelter settings through emergency water, sanitation, and hygiene services. Despite this progress, significant gaps remain. 
Assessment data from the Rapid Technical Assessment (Round 2) identified additional needs to meet minimum sector 
standards.  
Since 2 March, WASH sector partners have provided 833,000 litres of fuel to water establishments, sustaining public water 
supply services for an estimated 841,126 people. WASH partners further supported 271 water stations with fuel, repairs, 
and spare parts critical to maintaining network functionality under increased demand.  
Ninety-seven per cent of collective shelters are receiving WASH support. Displaced people inside collective shelters have 
received a total of 105,268 hygiene kits, 63,039 menstrual hygiene kits, and 1,394 cleaning kits. WASH partners have also 
provided 3,765,725 litres of potable water and 91,873 m³ of water to collective shelters through water trucking, addressing 
immediate drinking water needs in sites with limited or disrupted water supply.  
The sector's immediate priorities are the installation of water filtration systems to reduce dependency on emergency 
trucking, urgent fuel supply to sustain water networks, expansion of sanitation facilities, and ensuring hot water access in 
high-occupancy shelters. Funding constraints continue to limit the ability of partners to scale up, and rapid population 
movements are compounding service delivery challenges across all governorates.  
 
Logistics and Telecommunications 
As of 4 June 2026, the Logistics and Telecommunications Cluster (LTC) continues to support humanitarian operations 
through coordination, common services and information management. 
Humanitarian logistics operations remain highly dependent on a limited number of entry points, notably the Port of Beirut 
and the Al Masnaa border crossing, which serves as a primary land corridor for cargo entering Lebanon. Increased security 
risks, congestion and transshipment requirements along this route continue to delay logistics operations.  
The LTC’s common logistics services remain a key enabler of access. Transport services are provided free of charge to 
facilitate the delivery of life-saving assistance to hard-to-reach areas, while shared storage facilities are available to support 
partners with temporary warehousing and cargo consolidation. In response to partner needs, the LTC has expanded its 
support to include the coordination of regional convoys from Amman into Lebanon.  
Operational and security conditions continue to affect convoy movements. This week, two convoys planned to Zefta  (Al 
Nabatieh governorate) and were postponed due to security concerns. Despite this, on 4 June, the Logistics Cluster and 
partners successfully delivered one convoy to Tyre (South governorate), and a third regional convoy arrived from Jordan.  
On telecommunications, the overall network remains operational but increasingly fragile, particularly in southern Lebanon, 
where infrastructure damage and limited access continue to affect coverage and delay repairs. The Cluster supports 
partners through connectivity mapping, near real-time monitoring tools and coordination with service providers to facilitate 
site restoration and identify alternative solutions, including satellite-based connectivity where required. 
 
General Coordination 
The Inter-Sector Coordination Group (ISCG) and Operational Coordination Groups (OCGs), in close coordination with the 
Ministry of Social Affairs (MoSA) and the National Disaster Risk Management Unit (DRM), continue to monitor 
displacement and population movements to inform response planning and facilitate the timely provision of assistance.  
On 1 June, the ISCG convened to review response monitoring findings, identify operational challenges and remaining 
gaps, and finalize sector planning for the revision and extension of the Flash Appeal through 31 August 2026. 
Discussions highlighted increasing displacement from South Lebanon and Beirut’s southern suburbs, growing needs 
among populations residing outside collective shelters, and mounting funding pressures across sectors.  
On 3 June, the Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator (RC/HC) met with Sector Coordinators to review response
Lebanon Flash Update No. 32 | 7 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
progress, operational and funding challenges, and priority advocacy needs. Discussions focused on funding shortfalls and 
pipeline risks, support for populations residing outside collective shelters, continuity of essential services, and 
preparedness measures amid an evolving humanitarian context. 
The RC/HC also met with OCG co-chairs on 3 June 2026 to discuss sub-national response developments, access 
constraints, assistance to populations outside collective shelters, support to host communities, and preparedness for a 
potentially protracted displacement situation. The discussion further highlighted the importance of strengthening 
humanitarian access, sustaining support to overstretched local systems, and advancing planning for longer -term 
displacement scenarios. 
On 4 June, the Humanitarian Country Team (HCT) met to review recent humanitarian developments, access constraints, 
response updates, and the revised Flash Appeal, while discussing key priorities for continued humanitarian engagement 
and advocacy. 
 
Access and Civil-Military Coordination 
Humanitarian partners, supported by the Humanitarian Notification System (HNS), continue to facilitate access to conflict -
affected and hard-to-reach areas across southern Lebanon and other impacted regions. Between 2 March and 4 June, a 
total of 175 humanitarian movements were supported through the HNS . Of these, 144 missions south of the Litani 
River (SLR) were facilitated through established notification arrangements and coordination with the United Nations Interim 
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), in line with prevailing operational modalities. From 26 May to 1 June 2026, 19 movements, 
primarily to Tyre District, were cancelled and one movement was postponed by humanitarian partners due to security 
concerns and recent developments. 
These movements enabled the delivery of essential life -saving assistance, including bread, fresh produce, flour, safe 
drinking water, fuel, medical supplies, and core relief items and kits. Where feasible and requested, humanitarian actors 
also supported the relocation of vulnerable individuals from high-risk areas to safer locations. 
Since 17 April, humanitarian notification processes have remained suspended in areas north of the Litani River (NLR), while 
movements have increased south of the Litani River (SLR). Although most missions were completed, several experienced 
challenges such  as; delays, postponements, narrow operational windows, route -related constraints, communications 
disruptions, Global Positioning System (GPS) spoofing, unexploded ordnance (UXO) contamination, or cancellations due 
to operational challenges and development s. Some missions also encountered nearby hostilities and ongoing military 
activity during implementation. 
The operational environment remains highly volatile and unpredictable, with ongoing hostilities and evolving restrictions, 
particularly in the Israeli-declared military zone in southern Lebanon. Continued ambiguity surrounding this area following 
the ceasefire further complicates humanitarian operations and civilian access. 
For further information, please contact:  
Kristen Knutson, knutson@un.org