Insecurity
Insight
Data on People in Danger
2025
2025
LEBANON 
Violence Against Health Care in Con/f_lict
Lebanon
OVERVIEW  
Using data collected by Insecurity Insight, the Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition (SHCC) identified 
15 incidents of violence against or obstruction of health care in Lebanon in 2025, compared to 497 in 2024 
and 18 in 2023. 1  Among incidents reported in 2025, emergency medical services (EMS) were attacked on 
at least nine occasions and health facilities were damaged at least six times. At least three health workers 
were killed. 
Methodology and sources
Information on incidents of violence against health care in Lebanon is compiled from open and 
private sources and information projects. Data is continuously updated and numbers may change 
if new information is made publicly available. For the latest available figures, see Insecurity Insight’s 
global map on attacks on health care. See Methodology for further information. 
THE CONTEXT  
In 2025, Lebanon remained affected by a non-international armed conflict between Israel and the non-
state armed group Hezbollah. Despite a ceasefire announced on November 27, 2024, violations continued 
throughout 2025, resulting in civilian deaths and injuries and the widespread damaging or destruction of 
essential infrastructure. 
REPORTED INCIDENTS AND MOST COMMONLY REPORTED CONCERNS
2025
2023
2024
REPORTED
INCIDENTS
HEALTH
WORKERS 
KILLED 
INCIDENTS 
AFFECTING 
EMERGENCY 
MEDICAL SERVICES
INCIDENTS WHERE 
HEALTH FACILITIES 
WERE DAMAGED/
DESTROYED
497
15
310
9
209
6
408
3
18 9 2 9
Source: Insecurity Insight for the SHCC.
2
CARE IN THE CROSSHAIRS: VIOLENCE AGAINST HEALTH CARE IN CONFLICT   |  2025
Lebanon
Ongoing violence hindered reconstruction efforts , with Lebanon’s recovery and reconstruction needs 
estimated at USD 11 billion by March 2025. By 2025, approximately 4.1 million people remained in need 
of humanitarian assistance, with thousands facing high levels of acute food insecurity, including around 
22,000 people in IPC Phase 4 (“Emergency”) between November 2025 and March 2026. By September 
2025, around 82,000 people remained displaced due to ongoing Israel Defense Forces (IDF) armed violence 
and its occupation of parts of southern Lebanon, and by October approximately 64,000 were still internally 
displaced, primarily from southern border areas, including Bint Jbeil, Marjayoun, and El Nabatieh.
The early 2025 United States Agency for International Development (USAID) aid freeze disrupted planned 
US funding flows and contributed to the reduced availability of humanitarian assistance in Lebanon, 
particularly for nutrition, food security, and refugee support programs.
VIOLENCE AGAINST OR OBSTRUCTION OF HEALTH CARE IN 2025  
In 2025, violence against or obstruction of health care decreased dramatically in Lebanon following the 
ceasefire in late 2024, but overall insecurity persisted. Incidents were reported in three governorates (three 
fewer than the previous year), with most cases continuing to occur in Bint Jbeil, Marjayoun and Nabatieh 
districts in Lebanon’s southern Nabatieh governorate. 
Over half of the reported incidents involved attacks on EMS during the first five months of 2025. Damage 
to health facilities and health worker killings continued, despite the ceasefire, although at lower levels than 
in 2024. Maternal care services in Lebanon were disrupted when nearby IDF air strikes interrupted routine 
health services at a school, causing panic among children and teachers.2
All but one of the reported incidents were attributed to the IDF, often involving drone- or aircraft-delivered 
strikes that damaged health facilities and ambulances or struck areas in the vicinity of hospitals. In two 
cases, the IDF used drones to drop stun grenades on a health center and sound bombs on emergency 
workers as part of “double-tap” strikes while these workers were conducting recovery and rescue efforts 
after an earlier strike.3 The IDF also used sniper fire and live gunfire against emergency responders during 
recovery operations.
One incident was not attributed to the IDF: gunmen opened fire inside a hospital in Bekaa governorate, 
which was reportedly linked to a dispute involving a group member who had recently been admitted to 
the hospital.4 
A similar number of cases affected health care providers working for national health structures and 
providers affiliated with Hezbollah or the Amal Movement. NGOs, private health care organizations, Red 
Cross societies and UN agencies were also affected by IDF attacks. 
Attacks on emergency medical services
EMS were directly affected by violence at least nine times between January and May 2025, compared to 
310 times in 2024. Three emergency workers were killed and two injured, with most incidents occurring 
in Bint Jbeil, Marjayoun, and Nabatieh districts in Nabatieh governorate. Along with the previously 
mentioned drone-launched stun grenades and sound bombs, emergency workers were killed and injured 
by IDF armed drone and aircraft strikes (which in some instances were reported as being part of “double-
tap” strikes) or sniper fire while conducting body retrievals or responding to emergencies. Two paramedics 
3
CARE IN THE CROSSHAIRS: VIOLENCE AGAINST HEALTH CARE IN CONFLICT   |  2025
Lebanon
were killed by IDF gunfire as Lebanese families returned to their homes in southern Lebanon following a 
period of reduced hostilities.5 
Health facilities damaged
In 2025, health facilities were damaged at least six times, compared to 209 in 2024. In addition to the 
previously mentioned hospital attack by gunmen, four health facilities, including a newly established 
health center and a medical storage facility, were destroyed or severely damaged by IDF air strikes, while a 
fifth facility was struck by a stun grenade dropped from an IDF drone.6 
This chapter is based on 2023-2025 LBN SHCC Health Care Data. Download this 
data on the Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX). 
Insecurity Insight updates data continuously and numbers may change if new 
information is made publicly available. For the latest available figures, see Insecurity 
Insight’s global map on attacks on health care.
THE IMPACT OF ATTACKS ON HEALTH CARE  
With hostilities in Lebanon still ongoing despite the ceasefire, the reduced capacity to medically evacuate 
wounded and sick and the damaging or destruction of health facilities represented a loss of care capacity 
for those in need that significantly affected the survival chances of people living in areas where shelling 
and bombing occurred. Moreover, the losses represented by both the killing of health care professionals 
and the damaging or destruction of medical infrastructure are unlikely to be reinstated in the most affected 
zones, creating long-lasting gaps in the health care system.
Years of prolonged conflict and violence in Lebanon have led to widespread mental health challenges 
and psychological trauma. Children have suffered severe physical and mental  impacts from the conflict. 
There is an urgent need for mental health and psychosocial support, while persistent social stigma 
continues to impede child protection and mental health interventions. In February 2025, UNICEF reported 
that 45% of households had to reduce health spending and 33% lacked essential medications for their 
children. Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) patients described the ongoing trauma experienced in particular 
by children, with one noting that their daughter “faints at the sound of any strike, even if it’s far away, ” 
underscoring the long-term consequences of attacks on health care and the urgent need for protective 
and psychosocial support. 
Health needs that emerged during the conflict were further exacerbated by displacement, which restricted 
access to health care, placed additional strain on already overburdened health systems, limited the 
availability of essential medicines, and caused additional physical and psychological harm. Displacement 
likely worsened outcomes for individuals with non-communicable diseases  in 2025, because people’s 
attempts to escape from conflict-affected areas made it difficult for them to access essential medications. 
The damaging or destruction of Lebanon’s water supply infrastructure, compounded by drought, insecurity, 
and attacks on health care, continued to heighten the risk of waterborne diseases such as cholera, hepatitis  
A, and rotavirus, underscoring the urgent need for resilient water supply and health care systems. 
4
CARE IN THE CROSSHAIRS: VIOLENCE AGAINST HEALTH CARE IN CONFLICT   |  2025
Lebanon
Health needs were further impacted by food insecurity. Conflict and displacement drove high rates 
of malnutrition by limiting access to agricultural imports, arable land, skilled labor, and safe markets, 
disproportionately impacting agriculture-dependent governorates , degrading the food system, and 
heightening food insecurity. The destruction of water and food supply system infrastructure, compounded 
by the 2025 drought, drove high levels of food insecurity. Qualitative interviews by Action Against Hunger 
(ACF), Insecurity Insight, and Oxfam underscored the extensive, long-term impact of armed violence on 
communities and civilian infrastructure.
The functioning of health care infrastructure grew worse during 2025. By March, 33 primary health care 
centers and eight hospitals were completely closed. In addition to weakened and over-burdened health 
infrastructure, issues like violence, injury, trauma, and displacement all served as barriers to health workers 
being able to deliver care and carry out their roles. In December 2025, the International Organization for 
Migration, Lebanese Ministry of Public Health and International Lebanese Medical Association launched a 
project called Connecting Global Talent: Diaspora Engagement in Healthcare-Phase II that was designed to 
link Lebanon’s medically trained diaspora with local health care professionals. 
1 The SHCC’s 2024 Annual Report cited 485 incidents of violence against or obstruction of health care in Lebanon in 2024, 18 in 
2023. Data is continuously updated and numbers can change if new information is made publicly available.
2 Insecurity Insight. Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition 2025 Report Dataset: 2023-2025 LBN SHCC Health Care Data. 
Incident number 100256. 
3 Insecurity Insight. Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition 2025 Report Dataset: 2023-2025 LBN SHCC Health Care Data. 
Incident numbers 120878; 91152. 
4 Insecurity Insight. Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition 2025 Report Dataset: 2023-2025 LBN SHCC Health Care Data. 
Incident number 101571. 
5 Insecurity Insight. Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition 2025 Report Dataset: 2023-2025 LBN SHCC Health Care Data. 
Incident numbers 91149;105791.
6 Insecurity Insight. Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition 2025 Report Dataset: 2023-2025 LBN SHCC Health Care Data. 
Incident numbers 96303; 102004; 120878. 
5
CARE IN THE CROSSHAIRS: VIOLENCE AGAINST HEALTH CARE IN CONFLICT   |  2025
The Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition is a group of more than 40 organizations working 
to protect health workers and services threatened by war or civil unrest. We have raised 
awareness of global attacks on health and pressed United Nations agencies for greater global 
action to protect the security of health care. We monitor attacks, strengthen universal norms 
of respect for the right to health, and demand accountability for perpetrators. Suggested 
citation: Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalititon (SHCC) 2026. Care in the Crosshairs: Violence 
Against Health Care in Conflict, May 2026. https://shcc.pub/SHCCAnnualReport2025
https://safeguarding-health.com
Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition 
615 N. Wolfe Street, E7143, Baltimore, MD 21205 
SHCC administrator, safeguardinghcc@gmail.com
6