The mission of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) is to coordinate the global emergency response to save 
lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. We advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for all. 
www.unocha.org 
 
This report is produced by the OCHA Lebanon Office in collaboration with the Inter -Sector Coordination Group under the 
2026 Lebanon Response Plan (LRP) Framework 
KEY FIGURES 
HIGHLIGHTS        
● At least 4, 319 deaths and 12, 203 injuries due to 
hostilities recorded by the Ministry of Public Health 
since 2 March. 
● 646,107 people have returned to their areas of origin, 
while around 500,000 people remain displaced , 
including 37,000 Internally Displaced Persons (over 
53 per cent women and girls) in 430 collective 
shelters as of 6 July. 
● Basic services in hard -to-reach areas are under 
enormous strain or are non-functional. Nationwide, 3 
hospitals and 35 PHCCs are non -operational, with 
access to lifesaving services particularly challenging 
in conflict-affected areas.  
 
SITUATION OVERVIEW 
Ongoing military activity, despite an overall decline 
in the intensity and reach of hostilities, continues to 
pose risks to civilians, hinder safe return, and 
prolong humanitarian needs among people  in 
Lebanon. Israeli military air strikes, demolition s, and 
localized military operations in South and Nabatieh 
governorates persisted throughout the reporting period. Though the security environment has notably improved since the 
most recent ceasefire announcement, continued military activity in the south perpetuates further protection risks, prolongs 
displacement for those seeking to return, and further drives humanitarian needs throughout the country.  
Population movements continue to shift rapidly.  Between 2 and 6 July, the number of people residing in collective 
shelters declined by over 10,000 (21.5 per cent), from 47,143 people in 430 shelters to 37,000 people in 354 shelters. 
As of 2 July, the DTM recorded 646,107 returnees , an increase of 123,000 people  returning (23 per cent) since 25 
June, with most returns occurring in South and Nabatieh governorates . Despite rising return numbers, return movements 
     
Total displaced 
(IDPs) 
Displaced in 
collective shelters Shelters People killed People injured 
499,784 
 
(DRM, LRC, IOM) 
37,000  
 
(DRM) 
354 
(DRM) 
4.3 K  
 
(MOPH) 
12.2 K 
 
(MOPH) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lebanon: Flash Update #41 
Escalation of Hostilities in Lebanon 
As of 06 July
Lebanon Flash Update No. 41 | 2 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
remain fluid, cautious, and often reversible as families evaluate the extent of damage, safety conditions, and access to 
essential services. Continued support for basic services, shelter, unexploded ordnance (UXO) clearance, and early 
recovery remain essential to sustain safe and dignified returns. 
Displacement levels have declined over the last two weeks but remain significant, with 499,784 people still displaced. 
While returns continue, many households remain unable to return safely due to inaccessibility, insecurity, widespread 
housing damage, and strained or destroyed essential services in areas of origin, resulting in sustained or repeated 
displacement and increased strain on host communities. Alongside dignified shelter, food security and water, sanitation and 
hygiene ( WASH) needs, displaced populations are facing  declining economic capacity to maintain current housing 
arrangements, lack or loss of civil documentation hindering service access, and growing MHPSS needs, heightening 
protection concerns as displacement becomes increasingly prolonged. 
Collective shelter populations have continued to decrease ; however, displacement remains concentrated in a few 
governorates. Beirut continues to host the largest share of displaced in collective shelters, with 14,700 people across 73 
shelters, despite a reduction of 3,835 people in collective shelters  over the reporting period. South and Nabatieh 
governorates together host approximately 9,730 people in 70 shelters and remain key areas of displacement. At the same 
time, new , longer-term collective shelters are being established, particularly in the South and Nabatieh  governorates, 
reflecting the needs of households currently unable to return, or experiencing secondary displacement. 
Basic services in hard-to-reach areas are non-functional or under critical strain. According to WHO, three hospitals 
in the Israeli-declared military area remain non-operational: Bint Jbeil Public Hospital and Salah Ghandour Hospital in Bint 
Jbeil district ( Nabatieh) and Salah Ghandour Hospital in Marjaayoun (Nabatieh) . Those seeking services in operational 
hospitals in these areas face critical access constraints as hospitals continue to encounter challenges in fully reinstating 
lifesaving services, such as maternity care. Furthermore, the Ministry of Public Health reports that 35 Primary Health Care 
Facilities (PHCCs) are closed countrywide, 11 within the Israeli-declared military area, creating further barriers to accessing 
health services and heightening strain on remaining PHCCs . Continued displacement dynamics, fluid shelter populations, 
access restrictions, and attacks on healthcare are complicating the continuity of services, especially in hard-to-reach areas. 
The Ministry of Public Health reported 4,319 people killed (including 392 Women and 253 children) and 12,203 injured 
(1,450 women and 1,036 children) as of 6 July. 135 health care professionals have been killed on duty and 406 reported 
as injured since 2 March.  
Funding constraints remain a major challenge to sustaining humanitarian assistance. As of 6 July, the 2026 Lebanon 
Flash Appeal has received $269 million, or 42.2 per cent of the $639.9 million requested.  
 
HUMANITARIAN RESPONSE 
Humanitarian partners continue to deliver a coordinated, multi-sector response across Lebanon despite ongoing insecurity, 
repeated displacement, access constraints , and significant underfunding . Assistance remains focused on the most 
vulnerable conflict-affected populations, including displaced households living both inside and outside collective shelters. 
Response activities include multi -purpose cash, food assistance, health care, nutrition services, protection interventions, 
education support, shelter assistance, WASH services, and site management, with particular attention to women and girls, 
children, persons with disabilities, older persons, and households facing multiple vulnerability factors. 
Humanitarian partners continue to adapt to a highly dynamic operational environment, as the security situation,  access, 
patterns of displacement, and returns remain fluid. Nutrition Partners have screened 25,00 children under five and 5,044 
Pregnant and Breastfeeding Women (PBW) for wasting, identifying 947 PBWs and 749 children for referral, enabling the 
early identification of individuals requiring further nutrition support and treatment. Food Security partners reported an 
additional 300,000 hot and cold meals provided over the past week and over 2,000 ready-to-eat kits distributed for displaced 
households. Additionally, 3,342 vulnerable households received a one -off USD 250 cash -for-shelter assistance to cover 
urgent shelter costs, including minor repairs, rent, and utilities. 
The response is being reinforced through inter -sector coordination, ongoing needs assessments, and additional 
humanitarian financing secured under the revised Flash Appeal. Humanitarian actors continue to operate in a challenging 
environment marked by insecurity, access restrictions, and population movements,  while utilizing established civil -military 
coordination mechanisms to reach conflict -affected and hard -to-reach areas, including humanitarian notification system 
(HNS). Partners remain focused on sustaining life -saving assistance, addressing protection ri sks, and supporting safe, 
dignified, and informed decisions for displaced populations as the situation continues to evolve.
Lebanon Flash Update No. 41 | 3 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
 Multi-Purpose Cash Assistance (MPCA) 
Cash Working Group (CWG) partners continue to mobilize resources for the emergency response while closely monitoring 
market conditions and displacement trends to ensure that cash assistance remains feasible, responsive, and targeted to 
the most vulnerable populations outside collective shelters. To date, close to 839,000 conflict-affected individuals have 
received at least one tranche of Emergency Multipurpose Cash Assistance (EMPCA).  
Data to support the targeted phase of the Shock Responsive Social Safety Net (SRSN) response is expected to be shared 
this week, enabling the disbursement of the second and third payment cycles and ensuring continued assistance to the 
most vulnerable conflict-affected Lebanese households 
To strengthen reporting quality and consistency across partners, the Cash Working Group conducted a reporting training 
on 30 June for implementing partner focal points. The session covered MoSA SRSN reporting templates, including 
redemption and process-related reporting requirements, as well as CWG reporting on ActivityInfo, with a focus on the Daily 
Escalation R eporting Form and recent system modifications. Partners were reminded to report all emergency cash 
interventions through the Daily Escalation Reporting Form and to update previously submitted records. To support partners 
in meeting reporting requirements, the CWG also developed and disseminated a reporting user guide. The training was 
recorded and shared with sectors and partners to facilitate ongoing reporting efforts. 
 Education 
As displaced families continue to leave collective shelters, 354 shelters remain open across Lebanon, of which 244 are 
educational facilities: 189 public schools, 31 private schools, and 24 technical institutions. Education Sector partners 
continue to support displaced children . As of 6 July, partners have reached 88,850 displaced children through formal 
education and a further 5,528 through non-formal education pathways. To support learning at centres and in shelters, 
2,560 education kits have been distributed, individual student kits or learning materials provided to 2,020 children, and 157 
children with disabilities supported through assistive devices or rehabilitation  services. 
Under the Ministry of Education and Higher Education ’s (MEHE) emergency response, safe school readiness and 
emergency learning programme, the summer will focus on school reinstatement ahead of the 2026/27 scho ol year. For 
schools used as shelters, MEHE is preparing a decommissioning, and reinstatement needs assessment covering 356 
schools, though a significant funding gap remains. In parallel, based on MEHE's nationwide Attacks on Education 
assessment, 340 schools were damaged during the conflict, including 17 destroyed, while confirmed funding can only 
cover light rehabilitation of 10 schools. Without urgent action, at least 100,000 children risk being left without a 
classroom in September. 
MEHE has also presented its Emergency Summer Learning Recovery plan, aimed at continuing learning during the summer 
holiday and targeting Grades 1 –6. Implemented over six teaching weeks as an integral complement to formal education, 
the programme enables pupils to make up for learning loss, supports them academically and psychosocially in a safe 
environment, strengthens their readiness for the 2026/27 a cademic year, and prepares them for the national diagnostic 
assessment in early September, directly linking summer catch -up to school readiness. Funding shortfalls prevent national 
coverage of all students with disrupted education.  
 Food Security and Agriculture 
Since the escalation of hostilities on 2 March 2026, Food Security Sector partners have rapidly scaled up life -saving 
assistance for displaced populations across Lebanon. Emergency response efforts initially focused on supporting people in 
collective shelters, with partners delivering more than 15.3 million hot and cold meals and distributing 152,153  ready-
to-eat (RTE) kits containing items that do not require preparation, ensuring immediate access to food for newly displaced 
households with limited cooking facilities. 
To complement shelter-based food assistance, bread distributions have been expanded in coordination with the Ministry of 
Economy and Trade and the Union of Bakeries. Since April, partners have distributed 277,579 bread bundles through a 
network of 22 bakeries. Discussions are ongoing with  the Union of Bakeries regarding a potential second phase of bread 
distributions, subject to the availability of additional funding.
Lebanon Flash Update No. 41 | 4 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
 
Health 
Health Sector partners provided 440,640 health consultations to internally displaced persons and  distributed 160,434 
courses of medication through 197 primary health care centres (PHC Cs). Partner updates  indicate that collective 
shelter closures and population movements are contributing to declining occupancy in Beirut and Mount Lebanon shelters, 
necessitating that Primary Health Care Sat ellite Units ( PSU) activities be reduced or adjusted in several locations as 
displaced families return to the south or relocate to host communities. Partners continue to support emergency and trauma 
care, primary health care services, the provision of essential medicines, disease surveillance, and mental health and 
psychosocial support services. 
According to the World Health Organization (WHO) Surveillance System for Attacks on Healthcare (SSA), 221 attacks on 
health care workers, facil ities, and transport have been reported since 2 March , resulting in 135 deaths and 
406 injuries among health care professionals. While no new attacks on healthcare were reported since the previous 
report, insecurity, return movements, and access constraints continue to disrupt service continuity and operational planning, 
particularly in parts of the South and Nabatieh governorates.  
Overall, health facilities remain under pressure due to staffing shortages, supply gaps, damaged or partially 
functional health facilities and operational constraints, while vulnerable populations continue to face high out-of-pocket 
costs, limited access to essential medicines, specialized care, hospitalization, and fragmented referral pathways. Health 
partners continue to adapt service delivery  to population movements, sustain support to hospitals and primary healthcare 
services, and strengthen border health screening and referral mechanisms. Sustained funding and strengthened protection 
of health care services remain critical to maintaining service continuity and preventing further deterioration in health 
outcomes. Only 17 per cent of the Health Sector's funding requirements under the Lebanon Revised Flash Appeal 
have been met, limiting the continuity of life -saving services and underscoring the urgent need for sustained operational 
and financial support. 
 Nutrition 
Since 2 March, 49,868 children under five, adolescent girls, and P regnant and Breastfeeding Women (PBW) have 
been reached with emergency nutrition rations and micronutrient supplements, amounting to 750,416 rations and 
supplements providing at least one month of coverage. This includes 1,050 children aged 6–12 months residing inside 
and outside collective shelters who received age -appropriate complementary feeding kits. 24,939 children under five and 
5,044 PBW were screened for wasting, identifying 947 PBWs and 749 children for referral, enabling the early identification 
of individuals requiring further nutrition support and treatment. All designated facilities continue to deliver lifesaving inpatient 
care, with the exception of Mashghara Hospital (Bekaa), which is currently operating on an emergency-only basis. 
The national Infant and Youth Child Feeding (IYCF) hotline continues to serve as a critical support channel. Between the 2 
March and 6 July, 957 calls were received from caregivers, of which 741 were referred for IYCF support. Under MoPH-led 
Safe Provision of Breastmilk Substitutes (BMS) initiative, 456 infants under one year of age received infant formula support 
following individual assessments conducted by Nutrition Sector partners’ I YCF specialists, followed by the distribution of 
4,504 cans of infant formula. 
To strengthen the standardization of support for non-breastfed infants, Nutrition Sector partners conducted a training for 29 
frontline IYCF staff on the use of the newly procured Safer BMS Kits. 3 ,000 kits procured by UNICEF will be distributed 
through trained IYCF specialists under the MoPH -led Safe Provision of BMS initiative to support eligible non -breastfed 
infants in line with national guidance. Complementing these efforts, 19,777 caregivers of children under five participated in 
counselling and awareness sessions on IYCF, nutrition, and Early Childhood Development (ECD), delivered through both 
in-person and digital platforms. 
 Protection 
As of 6 July, 333,246 internally displaced persons and other affected individuals received protection services, over 63 
per cent of whom were women and girls . Assistance included Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA), 
Gender-Based Violence (GBV), and child protection awareness activities; psychosocial support for 111,819 individuals; 
case management for 2,377 people; protection cash assistance for approximately 11,848 vulnerable individuals; dignity 
kits for more than 36,180 women and girls; and specialized support for 2,236 persons with disabilities.
Lebanon Flash Update No. 41 | 5 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
Protection concerns remain significant, including UXO contamination, distress linked to repeated displacement, uncertainty 
among households unable to return, and severe financial hardship driving needs for rent, basic assistance, and livelihoods 
support. Reduced access to aid and employment, economic exploitation, rising costs, and protection risks faced by some 
displaced Syrians - including fear of arrest or deportation - continue to compound vulnerabilities. Ongoing shelter closures 
and consolidations are causing further relocations and distress, while frequent movement is disrupting service delivery, 
referrals, and continuity of care. Concerns also persist regarding shelt er conditions, including inequitable assistance 
distribution, limited transparency, movement restrictions, and inadequate sanitation facilities. Some households unable to 
return reportedly face pressure to leave shelters without clear alternatives, increas ing frustration and stress. 
GBV risks continue to be heightened by pre-existing gender inequalities, economic hardship, unemployment, overcrowding, 
loss of housing and livelihoods, and prolonged displacement. Partners reported incidents of violence against women, 
increased pressure o n women to generate income, and discriminatory pricing targeting some displaced Shiite women. 
Women also requested psychosocial support for husbands and children, while partners continued and expanded 
psychosocial support and awareness activities in and outside collective shelters. 
Child protection concerns include child labour among vulnerable households adopting negative coping mechanisms, 
alongside the need for continued safeguarding, age -appropriate awareness on body safety and personal boundaries, and 
monitoring of children in collective shelters. Repeated shelter transitions are disrupting participation in structured activities 
and continuity of support. Partners continued to provide psychosocial support, recreational activities, awareness sessions, 
and individual follow-up for children affected by displacement and repeated relocations. 
 
Shelter 
Within collective shelters, Shelter Sector partners have completed repairs at 411 sites to date. Of these, 188 collective 
shelters remain operational, while 223 have since closed amid ongoing population movements . Repair works that 
were ongoing in 31 additional sites have been placed on hold pending further monitoring of the situation, as collective 
shelters continue to close on an almost daily basis and priorities are regularly reassessed.  
The Shelter Sector is coordinating with sub-national Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) authorities on the rehabilitation 
of newly identified collective shelters in South and Nabatieh  governorates to accommodate returnees whose 
homes have been destroyed or who originate from areas that remain inaccessible or unsafe . Several partners have 
expressed interest in supporting repair and preparation of these sites, subject to operational requirements and approvals.  
Since 2 March, all households in collective shelters have received initial Core Relief Items (CRIs) , including 111,894 
mattresses, 149,073 blankets, and 75,894 pillows, in addition to other essential NFIs.  
Outside collective shelters, targeted assistance continues for vulnerable households, including those in hosted and rented 
arrangements. Distributions have included 29,792 mattresses, 42,347 blankets, and 18,832 pillows. CRI support for 
returnees shall be provided based on assessed needs : those in newly opened collective shelters in coordination with 
local authorities and site focal points; new arrivals in existing shelters where gaps are confirmed; and for returnees outsid e 
collective shelters through referrals and assessments, prioritizing households in unfurnished rentals lacking essential items. 
Additionally, 3,342 vulnerable households received a one -off USD 250 cash -for-shelter grant to cover urgent shelter 
costs, including minor repairs, rent, and utilities. 
 
Site Management and Coordination (SMC) 
In support of SMC partner fundraising efforts and to ensure alignment with the sub -sector guidance and response 
approaches, the SMC sub-sector coordination team conducted meetings with selected SMC partners for the 3rd LHF reserve 
allocation, to support prioritized site selection and the project development process. 
MEHE provided updates on Phase 1 of the site consolidation plan, which will target sites hosting less than 20 IDPs 
and private schools that were opened without authorization. The initial focus is Beirut and Mount Lebanon governorates 
before expanding to other areas. MEHE aims to complete this phase before September to ensure schools are ready for the 
2026/2027 academic year. The MEHE engineering unit is developing an SOP outlining the consolidation and site 
decommissioning process and is coordinating with governors on the list of sites to be used for consolidation.
Lebanon Flash Update No. 41 | 6 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
An analysis of SMC site prioritization showed that 214 sites will require immediate SMC support, while 169 sites will 
receive support subject to the availability of additional funding . Partners have been requested to coordinate with the 
SMC sub-sector for site allocation to ensure alignment with prioritization and avoid duplication or overlap.  
SMC partner IOM facilitated two training sessions targeting 45 MoSA frontline staffs in Nabatiyeh and North in addition to 
one training facilitated by DRC targeted 32 MoSA participants from Mount Lebanon  
 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
As of 06 July, the WASH Sector has reached 1,121,401 people across collective shelters, host communities, and out-
of-shelter settings through emergency water, sanitation, and hygiene services. Despite this progress, significant gaps 
remain. Assessment data from the Rapid Technical Assessment (Round 2) identified additional needs to meet minimum 
sector standards. 
Since 2 March, WASH Sector partners have provided 991,000 litres of fuel to water establishments , sustaining public 
water supply services for an estimated 860,797 people. WASH partners further supported 324 water stations with fuel, 
repairs, and spare parts critical to maintaining network functionality under increased demand.  
Displaced people inside collective shelters have received a total of 132,253 hygiene kits, 89,316 menstrual hygiene kits, 
and 1,840 cleaning kits. WASH partners have also provided 3,765,725 litres of potable water and 146,840 m³ of water 
to collective shelters through water trucking , addressing immediate drinking water needs in sites with limited or 
disrupted water supply. 
 Logistics and Telecommunications (LTC) 
While some organizations have reduced their reliance on coordinated transport services as commercial transport providers 
become more willing to reach certain destinations directly, the majority of humanitarian partners continue to rely on Logistics 
Cluster convoys to access some locations.  
With WFP support, the Logistics Cluster continues to facilitate movement of relief supplies through coordinated transport 
services, including convoys to hard-to-reach areas in Lebanon and facilitation of the Jordan–Lebanon corridor:   
• On 30 June, a convoy of 14 trucks delivered shelter, food, protection and WASH supplies to Tyre (South), while on 
2 July, three trucks transported dignity kits and ready -to-eat meals to Hasbaya (Nabatieh). Since March 2026, the 
Logistics Cluster has facilitated 33 convoys, supporting the delivery of multi -sector assistance to 
approximately 121,700 conflict-affected people.   
• The Jordan–Lebanon corridor remains a strategic regional access route, facilitating the movement of vital cargo 
through collaboration between Jordanian and Lebanese authorities and humanitarian community. Alongside 
supporting the delivery of joint inter-sectoral assistance, it enables maintaining an established regional supply route 
that can be leveraged to respond to evolving humanitarian needs.  
To ensure its services remain responsive to operational needs and continue to facilitate humanitarian activities across 
Lebanon, the Logistics Cluster has launched bilateral consultations with 25 key partners and stakeholders to review current 
activities and identify priorities for future support. 
GENERAL COORDINATION 
Initial consolidated monitoring results under the revised Flash Appeal indicate that approximately 1.1 million people have 
received at least one form of humanitarian assistance  as of 30 June . Multi-purpose Cash Assistance reported the 
highest direct beneficiary reach, followed by Food Security, Health, Shelter and Site Management, and W ASH. When 
indirect reach through the repair and maintenance of water facilities in the water establishments is also considered, WASH 
represents the sector with the highest overall reach. Partners continue to track reach and refine reporting as additional 
information becomes available to monitor the response.  
The Humanitarian Country Team met on 2 July to discuss strategic priorities for the response, including follow-up to recent 
high-level engagements, next steps from the HCT Retreat, and the proposed Lebanon Response Plan (LRP) 2026 
Addendum. Members also exchanged with the South Operat ional Coordination Group (OCG) on the evolving operational 
situation and support needs in southern Lebanon, and received updates on key protection trends, including the situation of 
Palestine refugees and displacement dynamics.
Lebanon Flash Update No. 41 | 7 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
www.unocha.org 
The Inter-Sector Coordination Group met on 3 July to review the latest response monitoring results, discuss the proposed 
LRP 2026 Addendum and planning timeline, and review draft guidance on targeting assistance for displaced populations 
residing outside collective shelters. Members also received operational updates from the Operational Coordination Groups, 
confirmed the rotation of OCG co-chairs, and discussed cross-sector operational priorities and coordination issues. 
Planning has commenced for an Addendum to the Lebanon Response Plan 2026 that will cover the period from 
September to December 2026. The Addendum will complement, rather than revise, the existing 2026 LRP by capturing 
additional humanitarian and immediate stabilization needs arising from the current escalation and not covered by the original 
plan. Sector consultations and technical planning will take place throughout July and August, with publication envisaged by 
early September. 
ISCG Co-Chairs, in consultation with the Ministry of Social Affairs (MoSA), finalized a draft guidance note to support a 
consistent, needs-based approach to targeting assistance for displaced populations residing outside collective 
shelters. The guidance aims to help partners prioritize limited resources while remaining aligned with the Government's 
position that in-kind assistance should, to the extent possible, be prioritized within collective shelters, with cash remaining 
the preferred mo dality outside collective shelters. The draft has been shared with Sector Coordination Teams and 
Operational Coordination Groups for review before submission to MoSA for final technical consultation.  
Lebanon secured an additional US$35.5 million in humanitarian funding to support implementation of the revised Flash 
Appeal, including US$12 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) and US$23.5 million through the 
Lebanon Humanitarian Fund’s Reserve Allocation (3rd in 2026). CERF funding will support Multi-Purpose Cash Assistance, 
Health and Nutrition, and Protection. The LHF allocation will support Food Security, Shelter and Site Management, WASH, 
Health and Nutrition, Protection, and Emergency Livelihoods interventions through national NGOs. 
 
Access and Civil-Military Coordination 
Despite the announcement of a renewed ceasefire, and the formal signing of the Trilateral Framework Agreement between 
Israel, Lebanon, and the United States, humanitarian operations in Lebanon continue to be conducted in a highly volatile 
and unpredictable  environment. Humanitarian partners rely on the Humanitarian Notification System (HNS) to facilitate 
access and movements to areas south of the Litani River (SLR) and parts of the north of the Litani River (NLR). Ongoing 
hostilities, evolving security dyna mics, and fluctuating access conditions continue to undermine operational predictability 
and pose challenges to the safe, timely, and sustained delivery of humanitarian assistance.  
Through the support of the HNS, humanitarian partners have maintained access to conflict-affected and hard-to-reach areas 
across southern Lebanon and other impacted regions. Between 2 March and 06 July, a total of 365 humanitarian 
movements were supported through the HNS, including 328 missions to locations south of the Litani River1. These 
missions were facilitated through established notification arrangements and coordinated with the United Nations Interim 
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), in line with prevailing operational modalities. 
While the majority of missions were successfully completed, several encountered operational constraints, including delays, 
postponements, restricted operating windows, route limitations, communications disruptions, GPS spoofing, contamination 
from unexploded ordnance (UXO), an d cancellations resulting from rapidly changing security conditions. Some missions 
were also conducted in proximity to hostilities or ongoing military activity, further complicating implementation and increasing 
operational risks. 
Despite these challenges, humanitarian movements enabled the delivery of critical, life-saving assistance, including bread, 
fresh produce, flour, safe drinking water, fuel, medical supplies, and core relief items. Where feasible and upon request, 
humanitarian partners also supported the relocation of vulnerable individuals from high -risk areas to safer locations. 
 
 
 
1 Main locations reached included Qlaiaa, El Nabatieh, Baalbek, Qaa, the southern suburbs of Beirut, Marjaayoun, Jdeidat 
Marjaayoun, Hasbaya, Chebaa, Ain Ebel, Tyre (including Palestinian camps), Rmeish, Ebel El Saqi, Fardiss, Bourj El Moulouk, 
Tebnine, Kaoukba, Souk El-Khan, and Naqoura. 
 
For further information, please contact:  
Kristen Knutson, OCHA Head of Office, knutson@un.org