07/07/2026 - 09:25
Two Turkish journalists arrested ahead of NATO summit


Turkish authorities detained two journalists ahead of a NATO summit in Ankara, their outlets and a rights group said.
Opposition website Bir Gun said its reporter Kayhan Ayhan, who has been covering the trial of Istanbul mayor Ekrem Imamoglu, was detained at his Istanbul home on Monday night for publishing "fake news". He was to appear in court on Tuesday.
The MLSA rights group said that journalist Hazar Dost was also detained while shopping for food in Istanbul on charges over his participation in a 2018 protest.






07/07/2026 - 07:54
🎥 Putin 'starting to understand he may not win' the war in Ukraine


Russia struck Ukraine's Kyiv region with ballistic missiles and drones on July 6, killing at least 11 people and wounding dozens on the eve of a NATO summit in Turkey.
This comes as, within Russia, the war has come under growing criticism as Ukraine has ramped up strikes inside the country and Russian casualties keep growing.
For FRANCE 24's Nick Holdsworth, these deadly attacks are a "sign of desperation" as Putin is realising he might not win the war.






07/07/2026 - 07:49
🎥 Ukraine must 'get the support it needs': allies prepare for NATO summit


"Allies must ensure that Ukraine receives the support it needs in its war with Russia" according to NATO chief Mark Rutte, ahead of a summit set to take place in Ankara, Turkey. He has also said allies will be announcing contracts worth tens of billions to "deter and defend". 
FRANCE 24's Kethevane Gorjestani tells us what to expect from the summit, and what it means for Ukraine.






07/07/2026 - 07:21
Ukrainian drone attack sparks fire at industrial facility in Russia's Kaluga region, governor says


An ​attack by ​six Ukrainian drones caused a fire ​to ‌break ⁠out at ‌an industrial enterprise ⁠in Russia's Kaluga region, southwest ​of Moscow, overnight, the regional ‌governor said.
There ​were no casualties, the governor, Vladislav ​Shapsha, wrote on ​Telegram. He ​did not ​name which facility was hit.






07/07/2026 - 06:50
Ukraine fired over 400 drones towards Moscow ahead of NATO summit


Ukraine launched more than 400 drones in the direction of Russia's capital, Moscow's mayor said, ahead of a crucial NATO summit in Turkey.
"From evening until 6:00am (0300 GMT), more than 430 drones were flying in the direction of Moscow region," Mayor Sergei Sobyanin posted on the state-backed MAX platform, adding that most were shot down "at distant approaches", while 36 were "destroyed on approach to Moscow".






07/07/2026 - 04:48
Ukrainian strikes kill one in Russia's Belgorod region


Ukrainian strikes killed one person in Russia's Belgorod region, officials said on Tuesday, after Moscow launched attacks that killed dozens in Ukraine on the eve of a major NATO summit.
Acting Belgorod regional governor Aleksandr Shuvaev said several Ukrainian missile strikes had targeted Belgorod city and the surrounding district.
"In the village of Belovskoye, Belgorod district, a civilian resident was, sadly, killed as a result of the first missile strike," Shuvaev said on the state-backed MAX platform.
He added that the attacks sparked a fire at an infrastructure facility in Belgorod city and that emergency services were working at the scene.






07/07/2026 - 04:48
NATO allies to unveil billions in defence deals ahead of summit


NATO leaders plan to unveil arms deals worth tens of billions of dollars in Ankara on Tuesday, aiming to show they are heeding US calls to spend more on defending Europe before joining President Donald Trump for a summit.
European governments will announce the deals at a NATO defence industry forum before Trump flies in to meet Turkish President Tayyip Erdogan and join fellow leaders of the military alliance for the summit, which begins with a dinner on Tuesday evening.
NATO Secretary General Mark Rutte said on Monday that Europeans had made "staggering" increases in defence spending, partly due to fears of Russia, which have surged since Moscow's 2022 invasion of Ukraine, but also because Trump had been "extremely forceful" in encouraging them to do so.






07/07/2026 - 04:48
 
Welcome to the France 24 liveblog covering events in Ukraine. Catch up on yesterday's developments 
here
.