Key events
Republican voters in Georgia will choose their Senate nominee in a runoff election on Tuesday, tapping either a congressman ⁠dubbed ‘Maga Mike’ by Donald ⁠Trump or a political ​outsider backed by governor Brian Kemp.
The winner - representative Mike Collins or former college football coach Derek Dooley - will face Jon Ossoff, a potential Democratic presidential candidate in 2028 and the only ⁠incumbent Senate Democrat up for reelection in a state that Trump won in 2024.
Collins finished first in the 19 May primary with 40% of the vote, 10 points ahead of Dooley. Trump endorsed Collins over ⁠the weekend, calling him a “WARRIOR and WINNER” who supported Trump “from the very beginning.“
Republicans hold a 53-47 majority in the Senate but have limited ​opportunities to win additional seats. Their top targets are Georgia ‌and Michigan, two states the ‌president narrowly won. But they have a tall task in unseating Ossoff, AP reports.
Charles Bullock, a political science professor at the University of Georgia, ‌said while Ossoff is more liberal than most Georgia voters, his office has a strong constituent services operation and he spends a lot of time in the state.
“Even Republican campaign consultants, activists like that, that I talk to are pretty much willing to concede that, yeah, Ossoff’s going to be able to hold this seat,” he said.
The Trump administration is waging war on voting rights using justice department lawsuits, FBI investigations, and an executive order to limit voting by mail, moves mirroring the US president’s false claims he lost the 2020 election due to voting fraud, say election experts and ex-officials.
Since 
Donald Trump
 began his second term, numerous 2020 election denialists have been installed in key agencies such as the DoJ, the FBI and elsewhere to pursue widely discredited claims of fraud, which can intimidate election workers and voters in swing states that Trump lost to Joe Biden in 2020.
The justice department has also filed lawsuits seeking sensitive voter data from 30 states – even though, by law, states control elections – and the FBI has launched investigations into debunked allegations of voting fraud in Georgia, Wisconsin and a few other swing states that Trump lost in 2020.
Trump in late March this year issued an executive order sharply tightening mail-in voting rules, which Trump has long claimed without evidence contribute to fraud. The order gives the United States Postal Service unprecedented powers to issue new rules making voting by mail harder.
The administration’s multi-pronged push to change voting rules is under way despite laws that empower states and Congress to set election rules, sparking lawsuits from states and nonpartisan voting rights groups.
Kirstin Garriss in Washington
There’s a transplant from Mar-a-Lago at the center of DCs mayoral primary race on Tuesday, but his name is nowhere on the ballot.
For the first time in more than a decade, 
Washington DC
 will have a new mayor this year as the city faces concerns about how to address public safety, housing affordability, and increased federal immigration enforcement in the district. How the next mayor handles Donald Trump is also key question on residents’ minds, with many closely watching to see if any of the president’s supporters are pouring money into the race, as well as the primaries for the city’s congressional delegate.
Two frontrunners, DC councilmember Janeese Lewis George and former councilmember Kenyan McDuffie, both 
Democrats
, are vying to succeed Mayor Muriel Bowser, who led the city during both of Trump’s terms in office. In a Democratic stronghold, whoever wins the primary is likely to win the election in November.
Lewis George,
 a democratic socialist and two-term city councilmember, has been campaigning on what she calls a “people-first platform”, promising to lower childcare costs and utility bills, stabilize rent for tenants, and prioritize downpayment assistance for homebuyers.
McDuffie,
 a former at-large city councilmember and former prosecutor, has garnered support from much of Washington’s business community, including restaurants and realtors, while promising to expand affordable housing, improve public safety, and diversify the local economy.
Oklahoma begins choosing a new US senator and governor in crowded primary
Hello and welcome to the 
US politics
 live blog.
Races for the Senate and governor in Oklahoma in primary elections begins today, as Donald Trump’s iron grip on the Republican party faces its next test.
Ahead of November’s midterms, president Trump has given his early backing to Kevin Hern in the seat previously held by Homeland Security secretary Markwayne Mullin in the deeply conservative state.
Hern has kept other potential big challengers at bay in Oklahoma, which hasn’t elected a Democratic senator since 1990, reports AP.
But a bigger test of Trump’s influence - which has usually proved potent in Republican primaries this year - may come in a crowded race to succeed outgoing governor Kevin Stitt.
Trump endorsed former state senator Mike Mazzei last month, wading late into a primary that includes several prominent Oklahoma 
Republicans
. They include attorney-general Gentner Drummond, former Oklahoma House speaker Charles McCall and Chip Keating, the state’s former public safety director.
It has raised the likelihood of an August runoff if no candidate receives at least 50% of the vote.
In other developments:




The United States and Iran have signed a memo of understanding giving them 60 days to find a way out of the war.
 The terms of the deal, which has not been publicly released, remain unclear. Vice-president JD Vance called the 1.5-page MOU a “very general document” whose details will be ironed out in the coming weeks of negotiations.




The future of the strait of Hormuz remains cloudy.
 US officials have offered conflicting forecasts for the future of the straight, with Trump saying that by the end of the week it “will be completely open,” while other officials say it may take longer for shipping to return to something approximating the pre-war status quo. Iran foreign ministry spokesperson Esmail Baghei, however, told reporters that Iran may still charge fees to pass through the straight.




Trump is in Évian-les-Bains, France, to attend the G7 summit
, where Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy is hoping world leaders will help him find a way out of his country’s four-year war. He spoke with 
Donald Trump
 ahead of the G7 meeting, which Russian leader Vladimir Putin is also attending.




California govenor Gavin Newsom is accusing Trump of directing the US justice department to investigate him and his wife.
 Newsom, a prominent Democrat, tweeted that Trump was coming after him because he is considering running for the president.