In addition to the NMF, the QFSM will help to delve deeper into the food security pillar of the NMF, in collaboration with WFP. The motivation behind this is to be able to provide more detailed sectoral information to meet individual cluster needs.


QFSM analysis and findings support WFP’s early warning system in identifying districts at risk of food security deterioration. These findings help trigger rapid needs assessments, including WFP Rapid Needs Assessments (RNA) and REACH Rapid Food Security Assessments (RFSA) (see ToR). The combination of QFSM monitoring with subsequent targeted data collection strengthens real-time monitoring of the food security situation across the country.


Background


Considering the high levels of needs amidst limited available resources as well as seasonal and geographic variations affecting Afghanistan, REACH proposes to jointly develop an analytical framework with WFP to monitor food insecurity across the country in near-real time. This will be critical to support a targeted response with subnational prioritization and possibly detect pockets at high risk of deteriorating food security to inform anticipatory action.


As a component of this framework and of broader real-time monitoring activities developed within the Afghanistan context, such as the Needs Monitoring Framework and Shocks Monitoring Index, REACH will develop an analytical framework to allow for a quarterly monitoring of food security outcomes. Leveraging existing data sources, this framework will allow for a quarterly overview of needs, by ranging districts by severity of outcomes and enabling to identify districts whose communities are experiencing a worsening of their food security situation, across the three key dimensions of food security. Eventually and as this analytical framework is rolled-out and perfected, its inclusion as a sectoral component of the multisectoral Needs Monitoring Framework will be considered and discussed with relevant stakeholders such as the Food security cluster.