Donald Trump has declared that the ceasefire with Iran is over as he arrived at the Nato summit in Ankara, launching an angry broadside in which he complained about the military alliance and repeated his demand for Greenland.
The US president, sitting alongside the 
Nato
 secretary general, Mark Rutte, called Iran’s leadership scum and “sick people”, and added that he was “very upset” with the alliance and even threatened to cut off all trade with Spain in a row over defence spending.
Overnight, the US had launched strikes on more than 80 Iranian targets around the strait of Hormuz and revoked a temporary sanctions waiver for Tehran to export oil after 
Iranian attacks on three commercial vessels
 on Tuesday.
When asked whether he thought the ceasefire was still in place as he met Rutte in Turkey, Trump said: “I think it’s over. I don’t want to deal with them any more. They’re scum. You know what scum is? They’re scum.
“They’re sick people. They’re led by sick people and they’re vicious, violent people. And if they had a nuclear weapon, they’d use it. As far as I’m concerned, it’s over.” However, he added that US negotiators wanted to keep talking.
European leaders were concerned Trump was in a bad mood after a Nato dinner on Tuesday night and were bracing themselves for a difficult summit meeting on Wednesday morning as the situation in the Middle East deteriorated.
Donald Trump during the welcome ceremony at the Nato summit in Ankara, Turkey on Wednesday.
 Photograph: Jakub Porzycki/NurPhoto/Shutterstock
That was confirmed when Trump sat down next to Rutte and began a diatribe, starting with 
Iran
. The president then returned to issues and themes that have irritated him during a year in which he started a war with Iran that led to a hike in oil prices, a loss of control in Hormuz and a failure to resolve the nuclear issue.
Trump said he was “very upset with Nato” and complained that alliance members “didn’t want to help us with the number one state sponsor of terror, that’s Iran”, a reference a refusal by European countries apart from the UK to allow the US to carry out bombing missions from Europe’s airbases.
There was a specific jibe aimed at the UK, which did not initially allow the US to use RAF Fairford in Gloucestershire for bombing missions in Iran before the British prime minister, Keir Starmer, changed his mind and allowed limited attacks on Iranian missile sites.
“The United Kingdom wouldn’t let us use the island for two weeks, so we had to fly back,” Trump said, reiterating complaints he made against Starmer and Britain in the spring as the Iran war continued without the regime in Tehran collapsing.
The 15-minute introduction next to Rutte became a litany of complaint. “Greenland is a big problem for us,” Trump said as he renewed his claim on the self-governing Arctic territory “very important for the United States, but it’s not important for Denmark”.
Earlier, the Danish prime minister, Mette Frederiksen, said as she arrived that Denmark would defend “every inch” of its own territory and emphasised that Greenland was “of course not for sale”.
Mark Rutte (centre left, pointing), Donald Trump (centre) and Keir Starmer (centre right) with other delegates at the Nato summit.
 Photograph: Win McNamee/Getty Images
There was a familiar comments about Nato defence spending from Trump, despite last year’s agreement by all members, with the exception of Spain, to lift national defence budgets to 3.5% of gross domestic product by 2035 – and so bring spending by Europe and Canada in line with the US.
“I’m very upset with Nato, that we pay far, far too much,” he said. “Billions and billions of dollars, too much, because it’s unfair, because we’re protecting them, so we protect them, but they’re not there for us.”
Fresh ire was reserved for Madrid given its decision to reject the 3.5% target. “Spain doesn’t agree to anything, and you shouldn’t carry them,” Trump told Rutte. “I don’t want to do any trade with them, alright?” the president said, turning to Scott Bessent, the US treasury secretary, who ‌replied: “Yes, sir.”
At first, through a mixture of flattery and occasional determined interruption, Rutte appeared to have blown Trump’s ire out – only for the US president to reignite when a journalist asked him if the Iran ceasefire was over.
The secretary general, a former Dutch prime minister, said there had been only a few “isolated cases” of European Nato allies not allowing US air force flights relating to the Iran war and that on Greenland he had made a deal with Trump at the Davos summit that would see Nato jets patrolling over the Arctic.
Rutte flattered Trump by saying he had persuaded allies to increase defence spending to US levels by 2035, adding that this had eluded a succession of US presidents. “You did what [President Dwight] Eisenhower tried to do,” he said, “It’s your win.” Trump, interrupting, responded “That’s why I like him” before the Iran question followed.
Spanish government sources said they were greeting the US president’s latest broadside calmly. “Our country maintains an excellent social, cultural and economic relationship with the US, and we have no intention of changing that,” they said.
Nato leaders have worked hard to try to Trump-proof the Ankara summit by agreeing a short draft communique in advance. It is expected to reiterate the alliance’s commitment to mutual self-defence if it is signed off by the leaders.
However, a report from Bloomberg suggested Nato might not hold a summit in 2027. The hope would be to avoid a repeat of the outburst that has dominated this year’s summit, which was supposed to showcase more than $50bn (£37.5bn) in joint arms procurements, designed to show Nato members were bolstering defence spending to deter Russian aggression.
Additional reporting by Sam Jones in Madrid