OVERVIEW:
 According to 
PHIVOLCS
 the magnitude 7.8 earthquake that occurred in Sarangani, Philippines was tectonic in origin and is attributed to subduction along the Cotabato Trench, a major earthquake-generating structure located off the coast. 
PHIVOLCS
 recorded a highest instrumental intensity of VII (PEIS), experienced in General Santos City and intensity VI in Palimbang, Senator Ninoy Aquino, Sultan Kudarat. In Indonesia, the earthquake was also felt and impacted Sangihe, Talaud, and Minahasa in North Sulawesi as reported by 
BMKG
 and 
BNPB
.


TSUNAMI
: 
PHIVOLCS
 reported tsunami observations in six areas with the highest waves recorded at 1.48m in Kiamba, Sarangani. 
PHIVOLCS
 lifted the tsunami warning at 1419H UTC+7. 
BMKG
 also reported tsunami waves with height at most 0.75m in North Sulawesi. 
BMKG
 lifted the tsunami warning at 1015H UTC+7.


IMPACTS & DAMAGES
:


PHILIPPINES


37 deaths (ongoing validation)


4 missing persons (ongoing validation)


488 injured persons (ongoing validation)


32.9K families (145.7K individuals) affected


8.7K families (32K individuals) displaced and accommodated in 54 evacuation centres (ECs) and 1,804 persons served outside ECs


2.5K houses damaged (460 totally damaged)


10 road sections and 2 bridges affected


12 cities/municipalities experienced power interruptions, of which 6 have been restored.


INDONESIA


1,160 persons displaced


95 houses damaged


2 churches damaged


2 schools damaged


1 hospital damaged


2 other buildings damaged


HAZARDS & ANTICIPATED RISKS


Aftershocks
 – As of 0600H UTC+7 today, around 1,055 aftershocks were recorded, with highest at M6.7 (
PHIVOLCS
).


Landslides
 – Mountainous and highly sloped areas are particularly vulnerable to earthquake-induced landslides, rock falls, and tension cracks, which could be further aggravated by heavy rainfall or subsequent aftershocks.


Liquefaction
 – In low-lying, water-saturated, and sandy areas, the intense shaking can cause liquefaction, manifesting as ground fissures, sand boils, and subsidence. This liquefaction-induced subsidence combined with changes in sea level can also make coastal areas and active river channels highly susceptible to seawater inundation.


RESPONSE EFFORTS:


PHILIPPINES


The Philippine President convened national and local officials and deployed Cabinet members to affected areas to oversee a whole-of-government response, including ongoing emergency operations, damage assessments, and relief efforts for communities impacted by the magnitude 7.8 earthquake.


DSWD
 is leading relief efforts, prioritising food aid, essential supplies, and the setup of safe evacuation centres.


Response efforts, led by the local governments, are prioritising search, rescue, retrieval, and debris clearing operations, while addressing urgent shelter needs such as housing repair kits, construction materials, and temporary shelters.


The Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines (
CAAP
) has restricted operations at General Santos International Airport to government, military, and humanitarian flights only.


The 
NDRRMOC
 remains on full 
RED
 alert together with their regional offices and local emergency operations centres.


INDONESIA


BNPB
, 
BMKG
 , and BPBD issued evacuation advisories and carried out comprehensive evacuations in districts/cities where tsunami impacts were detected.


BNPB
 coordinated with affected district/city BPBDs to collect data on casualties, affected populations, and infrastructure damage.


BNPB
 identified several challenges, including the remoteness of affected areas, with travel between locations requiring approximately 4–5 hours, and disruptions to communication networks caused by power outages.


The AHA Centre sent a letter of sympathy and offer of assistance to 
NDRRMC–OCD
 on 8 June 2026. In its response, NDRRMC expressed appreciation to ASEAN and ASEAN Member States and informed that a comprehensive assessment of the impacts and response requirements is ongoing. 
Should additional assistance be required, the Government of the Philippines will coordinate with the AHA Centre
 and formally communicate its needs. The AHA Centre EOC Alert Level remains on 
ORANGE
 and continues to coordinate closely with the affected ASEAN Member States, remaining on standby should ASEAN assistance be requested.


DATA SOURCES


ASEAN Disaster Monitoring & Response System (DMRS), ASEAN Disaster Information Network (ADINet); ASEAN Specialised Meteorological Centre (ASMC);


Indonesia: BNPB, BMKG;


Philippines: NDRRMC, PHIVOLCS;


Verified news media agencies