Key events
‘Insane’: Liberal senator on Hanson comments on trans rights
Earlier, the Liberal senator 
Andrew Bragg
, was asked on Insiders about 
a speech
 made by 
Pauline Hanson 
at this week’s CPAC summit in the UK, in which she said Australia’s stance on transgender rights was “stupid”.
In another speech at the conference, Bragg’s 
Coalition
 colleague, 
Bridget McKenzie
, claimed that Australians were not being consulted on the issue.
Asked about Hanson’s comments, Bragg said, “I think we have to be sensible about these things”.


double quotation mark
The reality is that if you want to have a free and fair society, then you don’t go out of your way to make life harder for people who are in a small minority. That’s always been my view that in public life, you should try and use whatever power you have to make life easier for people, not harder.


Now, in terms of the the trans community, it’s a small community, and I just don’t accept the view that Pauline Hanson expresses, that it’s some great risk to Australia. Where there have been issues, they should be addressed. But the idea that there’s a spectre of transgender people taking over Australia, I just think is insane.


Pianist Jayson Gillham peforms joint concert for Palestinian families
Pianist 
Jayson Gillham
 has performed a concert for Palestinian families.
Ahead of a national tour, Jayson Gillham (right) and Iyad Sughayer (left) performed at a private gathering for Palestinian families on Saturday.
 Photograph: Matt Hrkac/Palestine Australia Relief and Action
Gillham and Jordanian-Palestinian pianist 
Iyad Sughayer
 played together for families and refugee communities at a private gathering in Melbourne hosted by Palestine Australia Relief and Action (Para) yesterday.
Para founder, 
Rasha Abbas
, said:


double quotation mark
Healing is a long road. For Palestinians, for Gazans, for the families in our care, carrying grief and worry that most of us can barely imagine, there is no quick remedy. But music creates space. Space to grieve. Space to breathe. Space to feel held by something larger than ourselves. Space to remember that our shared humanity is greater than anything that divides us.


Earlier this month, Gillham said he was 
“very disappointed”
 after the federal court threw out his case against the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra, 
finding he was not unfairly dismissed 
over comments he made about Israel’s actions in Gaza.
Share
Updated at 
20.56 EDT
Coalition 
 says houses should be affordable but stands by pledge to roll back tax reform
Returning to Insiders, 
Andrew Bragg
, the shadow housing minister, has defended the Coalition’s election promise to reverse the Albanese government’s negative gearing and tax changes.
He says:


double quotation mark
We don’t think that higher taxes will create more houses, and the problem we’ve had in this country is we have had not enough houses built.


Asked if the Coalition supports the 
recent drop in property prices
, following a Resolve Political Monitor poll which suggests 61% of Australians support a decline, Bragg says:


double quotation mark
For younger people, some of that should be returned to younger people, because prices are too high in Australia for young people who are looking at, in some cases, 15 times a multiple of their salary to buy a first house. That is not fair. It is not reasonable, and so that’s why I think our policies must be focused on affordability over the longer term, which is really about how do you get a quarter of a million houses a year built every year in this country.


Bragg says Hanson has ‘made a business’ of criticism of minorities
The shadow housing minister, 
Andrew Bragg
, has been asked to weigh in on One Nation leader 
Pauline Hanson
’s claims about Muslim Australians at the 
UK’s CPAC conference this week
. He has told the ABC’s Insiders:


double quotation mark
Look, she’ll do or say anything to tee off against minority interests. She’s made a business out of teeing off against minority interests, and I think it’s very regrettable. But it’s free speech as part of our society. She’s allowed to hang out with whoever she wants to hang out with on a European holiday.


Asked if he is opposed to a preference deal with 
One Nation
, Bragg says:


double quotation mark
We will always shoot for majority government, and we reject a large part of the agendas of both the Labor party and the One Nation party … I mean, they’re both as bad as each other. It’d be a coin toss. I mean, I just think that they’re both very bad, and that’s why we are taking our responsibility very seriously, of being a party of government that can win an election across all of Australia.


Share
Updated at 
20.12 EDT
Liberal senator ‘strongly disagrees’ with Tony Abbott on multiculturalism
The Liberal senator 
Andrew Bragg
 says he “strongly disagrees” with 
Tony Abbott
 after the former prime minister said that multiculturalism had “failed in Australia”.
Bragg has been asked on the ABC’s Insiders about the comments made by Abbott, the current president of the 
Liberal party
, in a video posted to social media.
Bragg says:


double quotation mark
Well, I don’t agree with that, and I’d make the point that liberalism has actually created multiculturalism because it creates a framework for people to have freedom of religion, freedom of thought, freedom of conscience. And the Liberal party built modern Australia, if you look at the Menzies government opening up after the war, the Holt government abolishing parts of the White Australia policy, and then, of course, Malcolm Fraser’s actions to promote multiculturalism and introduce things like the SBS.


So we have a very proud record to stand on, and I think it’s very important that we’re clear about that.


Asked if Abbott should stop commenting on the issue, Bragg says: “He’s entitled to his views, and I strongly disagree with them.”
Liberal senator Andrew Bragg.
 Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP
Share
Updated at 
19.28 EDT
Jane Hume says Hanson’s comments on UK tour ‘un-Australian’
The deputy Liberal leader, 
Jane Hume
, has criticised 
Pauline Hanson
 for statements about migration and multiculturalism at the CPAC conference in London, telling Sky she condemns the One Nation leader’s comments.
“I think that they were unnecessary. They were divisive. They were inflammatory, and they were totally un-Australian,” Hume said.
“That’s not the way we operate in Australia. We have had a proud history of multiculturalism. We’re a great migrant nation.”
Hume said Hanson was wrong to lament the removal of the White Australia policy in the 1960s and 1970s.


double quotation mark
If we’re going to have the prosperous and progressive society that we have always wanted, that we’ve always enjoyed in Australia, we need to make sure that we have a migration program that’s delivering for our country, that’s driving productivity, not taking away from it, but restoring a White Australia policy is not part of that.


Deputy leader of the opposition, Jane Hume.
 Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP
Share
Updated at 
21.22 EDT
Hanson ‘taking us nowhere’ on divisive race debate: Labor
Pauline Hanson
’s 
appearances
 with far-right activist 
Tommy Robinson
 and at a conservative political conference in London have been criticised at home, with Labor frontbencher 
Andrew Charlton
 calling the One Nation leader “incredibly divisive”.
Pauline Hanson listens to a speech by Reform UK leader, Nigel Farage at the CPAC Great Britain summit.
 Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images
The assistant minister for science, technology and the digital economy told Sky News Hanson’s comments about migration and multiculturalism weren’t adding to the national political debate.
“Australia is a multicultural country,” he said.


double quotation mark
Waves of migrants have added a huge amount to our country, and I just think it’s incredibly divisive to be saying that some groups should be here and suggest that other groups shouldn’t be here.


Now that’s divisive, and importantly, I just don’t think it takes us anywhere as a nation. It doesn’t address any of the real challenges that we have in this country. It’s not building new homes. It’s not helping people with cost of living. It’s not reforming our tax system.


Share
Updated at 
19.09 EDT
Rising fuel prices could force interest rate rise
Shane Oliver
, chief economist at AMP, said fuel prices could rise another 10 cents as the rebound in oil prices had not yet fully flowed through, in a note on Friday.
Oil prices would rise further if the conflict in the Middle East continued and global stockpiles ran short, Oliver said.


double quotation mark
The longer the strait remains closed and the war escalates, the greater the risk that oil prices will have to rise to around $US150/barrel to bring demand down to match the hit to supply.


Prices are set to rise a further 16 cents when the federal government’s partial fuel relief expires on 2 August. Oliver predicted the government would extend the excise cut.
Rising prices would add to inflation, increasing the chance of an interest rate hike from the Reserve Bank. Markets on Friday were betting on a 65% chance of a hike by December, up from about 50% a week earlier.
Diesel prices rise 15 cents in five days
Diesel prices have risen 15 cents a litre in five days as Donald Trump’s war in Iran lifts global oil prices.
Oil and fuel costs have risen to their highest levels in over a month. Brent crude oil prices fell to nearly US $70 a barrel after the mid-June peace deal between the US and Iran but have risen to US$88 after over a week of strikes.
Rising oil costs have pushed up wholesale prices for diesel and petrol, with service stations passing the increase on to motorists.
Diesel prices have risen from 192.8 to 209.9 cents per litre from Monday to Saturday in Melbourne, according to MotorMouth average data. Diesel hit 207.1 cents in Brisbane, 205.1 in Sydney, 204.3 in Adelaide and 201.5 in Perth.
Unleaded petrol prices are up seven cents per litre in a week, at 177.5 cents per litre in Brisbane, 175.8 in Melbourne and 172.5 in Sydney.
A man pumps fuel into a vehicle at a petrol station in Sydney.
 Photograph: Hollie Adams/Reuters
Ski fields reach July temperature high on Saturday
It was a remarkably warm day in the Australian alps yesterday, with several ski fields reaching temperatures that look set to be record-breaking (the records are yet to be confirmed by the Bureau of Meteorology’s climate team).
Mount Hotham reached 11.1C. That’s 2.4C higher than the previous July record of 8.7C set in 1994.
Perisher ski resort in June.
 Photograph: Mike Bowers/AAP
Falls Creek hit 11.5C, topping it’s previous highest July maximum of 9.8C in 1992.
Perisher in New South Wales hit 11.9C, which also looks set to be a new July high.
Dr 
Andrew Watkins
, a research associate at Monash University who 
posted
 the observations to social media, remarked:


double quotation mark
Big slow moving high pressure systems creating large areas of descending & warming air hitting a radiation inversion = warm air trapped above the ground. Plus climate change…


Back in June, the BoM was anticipating poorer conditions for snow, with a warmer and drier winter forecast.
Share
Updated at 
19.20 EDT
Welcome
Good morning, and thanks for joining us. I’m 
Penry Buckley
 and I’ll be taking you through today’s breaking stories. Let’s get started.
Several ski fields have recorded temperatures that look to be record-breaking on a remarkably warm day in the Australian alps yesterday. More details on that soon.
Diesel prices have risen 15 cents a litre in five days as 
Donald Trump
’s war in Iran lifts global oil prices, with fighting escalating over the strait of Hormuz.