In 2025, hunger was driven by violent conflicts, natural disasters, and economic shocks, compounded by severe constraints on humanitarian access, which limited food availability for those most in need.


More than 1.4 million people lived in famine-like conditions across six WFP operations – Haiti, Mali, the State of Palestine (Gaza), South Sudan, the Sudan and Yemen. This is fifteen times the figure reported prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. For the first time this century, two simultaneous famines were confirmed in Gaza and the Sudan. Beyond these contexts, millions more experienced acute food insecurity across multiple hotspot countries.


Humanitarian space continued to narrow as violence against civilians – and the humanitarian workers who sought to assist them – intensified. Over the last three years, more than 1,000 humanitarian workers have been killed, including 334 in 2025 alone.


In 2025, as needs increased, WFP operated under exceptional pressure because of sharply declining resources. WFP raised USD 6.5 billion, yet covering only 41 percent of operational requirements, resulting in a substantial funding gap and requiring significant reprioritization of activities and delivery.


Within these constraints, WFP and its partners delivered assistance at scale, reaching 121 million people, with women and children accounting for the majority of beneficiaries, and distributing 2.3 million metric tons of food and USD 2.2 billion in cash and vouchers.


However, these figures do not fully capture the level of assistance provided.


As WFP former Executive Director, Cindy McCain highlighted “WFP could not meet every need. We were forced to make impossible choices, and this report accounts honestly for those choices.”


Under severe funding constraints, WFP made difficult trade-offs between reaching populations in need and maintaining adequate levels of assistance. This resulted in reduced ration sizes, shorter assistance duration, tighter targeting and, in some cases, the scaling down or suspension of operations. Overall, only 47 percent of planned food and cash-based transfers were delivered.


These constraints had a significant impact on the intensity of assistance provided and on nutritional outcomes of the beneficiaries.


At the same time, WFP strengthened efficiency and performance management to maximize the impact of scarce resources. Cost-containment measures, improved prioritization and efficiency gains were applied across operations to safeguard life-saving assistance and maintain operational continuity in a constrained environment.


These efforts, coupled with the resetting of WFP regional offices and enhanced country office support, align with broader UN80 reforms, and well-position WFP to lead on integrated supply chains. WFP efficiency gain initiatives improved efficiency, reduced duplication and strengthened collective impact across the United Nations system, reinforcing disciplined use of resources and stronger delivery in complex operating environments. Through WFP’s shared services, other UN agencies have saved over USD 8 million as efficiency.


The 
Annual Performance Report 2025
 provides a transparent account of the extremely difficult trade-offs between reach, adequacy and continuity of assistance in a highly constrained operating environment.


It presents aggregated results on WFP’s global performance, describing who was assisted, how assistance was delivered, how resources were mobilized and used and what results were achieved, while underscoring the importance of predictable and flexible funding to sustain both the scale and the adequacy of life-saving assistance.


Other complementary products, including the Snapshot, annexes and the dashboard, can be found here 
WFP Annual Performance Report (APR) | WFPgo