Bakhtiari nomads, wearing traditional dress, hold their guns during a pro-government gathering near the residence where former Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, shown on a banner, was killed in U.S. and Israeli strikes on Feb. 28, in Tehran, Iran, Monday, May 18, 2026.
                

                    
                    Vahid Salemi/AP
                    
                


hide caption






toggle caption





        
        Vahid Salemi/AP
        
    






WASHINGTON — President Donald Trump said he is holding off on a military strike on Iran planned for Tuesday because "serious negotiations" are underway to end the war.


"There seems to be a very good chance that they can work something out. If we can do that without bombing the hell out of them, I'd be very happy," Trump said at the White House on Monday evening, after first making the announcement in a social media post.
 
Trump said he had planned "a very major attack" but put it off — "for a little while, hopefully, maybe forever." He said America's allies in the Gulf asked him to wait for two to three days because they feel they are close to a deal with Iran.


Trump has been threatening for weeks that the ceasefire reached in mid-April could end if Iran did not make a deal, with shifting parameters for striking such an agreement. Over the weekend he warned, "For Iran, the Clock is Ticking, and they better get moving, FAST, or there won't be anything left of them."
 
The president has repeatedly set deadlines for Tehran and then backed off. But he's also previously indicated he would hold off on military action to allow talks to continue — only to turn around and launch strikes. That's what happened at the war's outset, when he ordered strikes in late February shortly after indicating he would let talks play out.
 
Trump said the current pause for negotiations was a "very positive development," while acknowledging there were times in the past when a deal seemed close but nothing came of it. "But this is a little bit different," he said.
 
Trump credits Gulf allies
 
The president, who had not previously disclosed that he was planning a strike for Tuesday, did not offer details about the planned attack but said in his social media post he had instructed the U.S. military "to be prepared to go forward with a full, large scale assault of Iran, on a moment's notice, in the event that an acceptable Deal is not reached."


Trump said he was calling off the attack at the request of allies in the Middle East, including the leaders of Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
 
Iran and allied Shiite militias in Iraq have launched drone attacks targeting the Gulf Arab states in the war. The United Arab Emirates has recently accused Iran of launching drone and missile attacks despite the ceasefire. On Sunday, a drone strike sparked a fire on the edge of the UAE's sole nuclear power plant in what authorities called an "unprovoked terrorist attack" while not assigning blame.
 
Trump in recent days has also spoken with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Chinese President Xi Jinping about the Iran war.
 
Oil prices affected
 
Trump's post quickly caused a fall in the price of oil, which had been rising on the prospect of a prolonged standoff that would keep the Strait of Hormuz effectively closed.
 
Minutes before the president's announcement, petroleum futures had been trading at $108.83 a barrel. His word about negotiations almost instantly shaved more than $2 off the price, but it crept up again and ended on Monday at $107.25 a barrel.


Shortly after Trump's post, Iranian state TV called it a "retreat" based on "fear" in its broadcast ticker and on its X account.
 
It reported earlier that defense systems were activated late Monday on Qeshm Island in the Strait of Hormuz. It added the situation was "under control" there, the largest Iranian island in the Persian Gulf, home to about 150,000 people and a water desalination plant.
 
Major sticking points remain
 
Iran has effectively closed the Strait of Hormuz, a vital waterway for the shipment of oil, gas, fertilizer and other petroleum products. The U.S. is blockading Iranian ports and has redirected 85 commercial vessels from mid-April through Monday, U.S. Central Command said in a social media post.


Earlier Monday, Turkey's Foreign Minister Hakan Fidan said the immediate concern of the negotiations between the U.S. and Iran was keeping the Strait of Hormuz open, but Iran's nuclear program remained a central issue.
 
Speaking during a joint news conference with his German counterpart in Berlin, Fidan said much of Iran's enriched uranium that could potentially be used for a nuclear weapon was buried under collapsed tunnels following attacks in June that the U.S. launched with Israel. The U.S. has said it is closely monitoring any movements around the stockpile.
 
"At present, there isn't a situation that poses a real threat," Fidan said. "But for this to continue, the parties must reach and conclude a nuclear negotiation among themselves."
 
The Turkish minister said he believes Iran is not opposed in principle to complying with nuclear conditions, but added: "the question is what will be given in return, in what order, and under what conditions."
 
With talks at a standstill last week, Iran's foreign minister said Friday that a lack of trust was the biggest impediment to negotiations.
 
Iran, which says its nuclear program is for peaceful purposes, was said to have included some nuclear concessions in its latest proposal to end the war. But Trump dismissed the proposal as "garbage."