Lebanon: Violence Against Health Care Persisted in Lebanon in 2025 Despite Ceasefire


Using data collected by Insecurity Insight, the Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition (SHCC) identified 
15 incidents
 of violence against or obstruction of health care in Lebanon in 2025, compared to 497 in 2024 and 18 in 2023. Emergency medical services were attacked on at least nine occasions and health facilities were damaged at least six times. At least three health workers were killed.


Key findings:


All but one of the reported incidents were attributed to the IDF, often involving drone- or aircraft-delivered strikes that damaged health facilities and ambulances or struck areas in the vicinity of hospitals.


Maternal care services were disrupted when nearby IDF air strikes interrupted routine health services at a school, causing panic among children and teachers.


Health needs that emerged during the conflict were further exacerbated by displacement, which restricted access to health care, placed additional strain on already overburdened health systems, limited the availability of essential medicines, and caused additional physical and psychological harm.


Full report available in
 
Arabic
 
and
 
English


The report forms part of SHCC's annual report
'Care in the Crosshairs'
.


Insecurity Insight updates data continuously and numbers may change if new information is made publicly available. For the latest available figures, see Insecurity Insight’s 
global map
 on attacks on health care since 2016.


Other resources


Insecurity Insight's 
social media monitoring brief
 analyses public narratives surrounding attacks on first responders in Lebanon, and examines how rescue and health organisations were discussed across two distinct social media environments: Lebanon and Israel. In Lebanon the conversation was event-driven and overwhelmingly supportive of first responders — volume spiked after specific incidents, notably the week of 21–27 April following the killing of journalist Amal Khalil on 22 April, when Lebanese Red Cross rescue teams were themselves fired on with a sound grenade and live ammunition. In Israel the conversation was driven by persistent narratives rather than events - volume was flat week-on-week, with little engagement with the human consequences of strikes on first responders, and a higher share of critical content. Two clusters dominated: allegations of medical-emblem misuse and complicity with armed groups, and accusations that the ICRC is complicit through silence or cooperation.


Insecurity Insight’s report 
The Impact on Emergency Services
 examines how the conflict between Iran, Israel, Lebanon and the United States has impacted emergency medical services across the Greater Middle East region. The highest number of incidents affecting emergency medical services were recorded in Lebanon. Nearly three quarters of incidents were attributed to Israeli forces. Sequential strikes on emergency responders were documented in Iran, Iraq and Lebanon. Emergency responders in southern Lebanon reported delays and heightened risks during rescue operations.


Drawing on a decade of systematically collected data, 
Still Under Attack
documents the scale, patterns, and consequences of attacks on health care in conflict-affected settings worldwide since the adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 2286 in 2016.


Based exclusively on Insecurity Insight’s data collection, it highlights how violence against health care is becoming normalised, with serious consequences for civilians, disease response and health systems.


The report provides detailed analysis of perpetrators, methods of attack and emerging risks, including the growing role of new technologies in conflict environments. It also offers recommendations for governments, international organisations, humanitarian actors and the diplomatic community aimed at strengthening the protection of health care and improving accountability for violations.


Suggested citation: Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalititon (SHCC) 2026. Care in the Crosshairs: Violence Against Health Care in Conflict, May 2026. 
https://shcc.pub/SHCCAnnualReport2025