Fragile gains in assistance delivery amid lull in conflict, but risk of Famine persists 
Key Messages 
South Sudan - Key Message Update May - September 2026 
Emergency (IPC Phase 4) outcomes are expanding during the 
lean season, likely reaching 34 counties across the north and 
northeast by September. Deterioration is due to expected 
conflict- and flood-driven disruptions to household access to 
markets, assistance, and local food sources, and seasonally 
declining market supply amid rising costs. Acute malnutrition 
prevalence is expected to rise and surpass Extremely Critical 
levels by June in 11 counties. Violence has decimated health 
and nutrition service access, and widespread displacement has 
worsened disease spread (with rainy season exacerbations 
likely). Akobo, Nyirol, Uror, Fangak (Jonglei), Nasir, and Ulang 
(Upper Nile) remain areas of highest concern: populations with 
limited access to food and humanitarian assistance are expected 
to face Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) through September. 
A credible risk of Famine (IPC Phase 5) persists in Akobo, 
Nyirol, Nasir, and Ulang. Of particular concern are areas with 
ongoing or recent accessibility constraints (such as Chuil 
and Nyatim of Nyirol); areas at risk of renewed obstruction due 
to conflict and/or flooding; and areas hosting high numbers of 
internally displaced persons (IDPs). IDPs have often fled violence 
multiple times, lost income and food sources, and are most 
exposed to surging disease outbreaks in overcrowded 
conditions. If conflict escalates and isolates populations from 
food (including local sources and assistance) for a prolonged 
period, then Famine (IPC Phase 5) would likely occur. 
Amid persistent access constraints, humanitarians are 
scaling up the May-August lean season response in 26 
counties, reaching at least 632,000 people (of the monthly 
target of 1.8 million) by mid-May. In the counties at risk of 
Famine (IPC Phase 5), distributions were underway in Nasir, 
Nyirol, and Akobo, and planned for June in Ulang. However, 
violence continues to undermine deliveries in Lankien (Nyirol), 
parts of Nasir, and Ulang. In Akobo, humanitarians are taking 
advantage of the lull in conflict, with WFP reportedly reaching 
more than 60,000 people with assistance; partners continue to 
conduct mass screenings of an estimated 1,000 children per day 
to identify and treat acute malnutrition. At least 36,000 South 
Sudanese returned to Akobo from Gambela, Ethiopia, seeking 
assistance. Despite the scale up of assistance, there is a high risk of conflict disrupting delivery. 
Elsewhere in the 26 counties targeted for planned food and cash assistance responses, May distributions 
were already underway in Fangak, Canal/Pigi, Ayod, and Uror (Jonglei), Greater Pibor Administrative Area 
FEWS NET is a United States Government-funded activity. The content of this report does not
necessarily reflect the view of the United States Government.
FEWS NET South Sudan
southsudan@fews.net
fews.net/east-africa/south-sudan
Recommended citation: FEWS NET. South Sudan Key Message Update May - September 2026: Fragile gains in assistance 
delivery amid lull in conflict, but risk of Famine persists, 2026. 
Key Message Update 
This Key Message Update provides a high-level analysis of current acute food insecurity conditions and any changes to FEWS NET's latest projection of acute food insecurity outcomes 
in the specified geography. Learn more here. 
(GPAA), Longochuk (Upper Nile), and Panyijiar (Unity), while remaining counties were anticipated to receive the 
first distributions in late May or early June, according to recent plans. Insecurity and obstruction have disrupted 
distributions in Longochuk and Canal/Pigi. Overall, in May, food and cash assistance is expected to mitigate 
severity to Crisis! (IPC Phase 3!) in Duk, Uror, Leer, Rubkona, and Panyijiar. 
Conflict remains the primary driver of severe food insecurity, disrupting humanitarian operations, 
markets, and crop and livestock production. Clashes between the South Sudan People’s Defense Forces 
(SSPDF) and SPLA-IO forces occurred in Longochuk and Nasir between late April and early May, resulting in 
displacement, civilian casualties, and disruption to humanitarian operations. Sporadic attacks involving SSPDF 
and SPLA-IO were also reported in Torit (Eastern Equatoria), disrupting first season crop production. Several 
incidents of retaliatory intercommunal conflict were reported in Greater Tonj (Warrap) and Duk and Twic East 
(Jonglei), resulting in over 100 deaths, displacement, livestock raids, and disruption to livelihood activities. 
Internal and cross-border displacements remain volatile amid fluid conflict dynamics and as households 
seek access to limited assistance. There were more than 300,000 IDPs in Jonglei and Upper Nile between 
January 1 and May 7. With the lull in conflict and scale-up of assistance, nearly 79,000 previously displaced 
South Sudanese returned from Ethiopia to parts of Jonglei and Upper Nile in May, including 5,000 to parts of 
eastern Nasir and 36,000 to Akobo. The daily inflow of returnees and refugees from Sudan remains low and 
slowly declining due to a combination of relative calm in some eastern areas of Sudan, engagement in the 
upcoming agricultural season, and increased conflict and deteriorating economy in South Sudan. Nonetheless, 
the elevated presence, at nearly 1.4 million people, continues to strain resources and sustain high needs. 
Following widespread early and above-average rain in March, atypically dry conditions prevailed 
through mid-May. While rainfall was cumulatively near average for the first season in the southwestern 
bimodal areas, these late-season dry spells are affecting crop growth. In the unimodal north and northeast, the 
early rains encouraged localized early planting; However, field monitoring indicates poor germination and crop 
wilting by late April and May due to dry spells, likely to result in poor crop establishment and reduced yields. 
South Sudan’s macroeconomic conditions remain poor despite increased revenues from increased oil 
production and high global prices. Crude oil production increased 16.3 percent from January to May. Yet, the 
cash liquidity crisis persists amid ongoing fiscal mismanagement and lack of diversification, even as the 
government seeks to improve cash availability though commercial banks and increase non-oil revenue 
streams, such as via the E-permit system. The liquidity crisis and low inflows of foreign currency continue to 
drive depreciation, with the SSP value declining 6-17 percent year-on-year on the official and parallel markets.  
The rising fuel prices in regional markets due to ongoing supply chain disruptions linked to the Middle 
East crisis are increasing supply costs and food prices. Compared to February 2026 (when fuel prices first 
spiked), fuel prices in May were 45-105 percent higher in Aweil Centre, Juba, Rumbek Centre, Wau, and Bor 
South, and 50-90 percent higher than the same month last year. Increasing fuel prices are passing through to 
retail costs, exacerbating seasonal price increases as supplies decline. Based on price monitoring data, the retail 
prices of red sorghum per malwa (3.5 kilograms) in Wau, Rumbek Centre, Juba, and Aweil Centre were 8-50 
percent higher in May than February due to increasing supply cost and household stock depletion. 
* FEWS NET classification is IPC-compatible with limited exceptions. IPC-compatible analysis follows key IPC protocols but does not necessarily reflect the consensus of national food security 
partners. As of IPC 3.0, the IPC no longer assesses the impact of food assistance on classification and thus no longer maps the (!). However, FEWS NET continues to produce food security 
maps inclusive of the (!) as well as maps compatible with IPC 3.0/3.1, which include the mapping of food security assistance bags. In rare cases, FEWS NET classification is IPC-aligned but 
not IPC-compatible. IPC-aligned analysis is evidence-based but some types of evidence required for IPC-compatibility were not available. 
Key Message Update May - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 2