***People may receive multiple forms of assistance and services. 
KEY FIGURES: 
UKRAINE EMERGENCY 
UNHCR Operational Update  
 
10 July 2026 
 
 
*In alignment with the humanitarian inter-agency and cluster reporting systems, UNHCR and partners will continue to publish narrative and response figures on a monthly basis.  
On 2 July, Kyiv came under a massive Russian aerial attack with 74 missiles and almost 500 drones. Authorities reported 31 people killed and dozens injured, while homes and critical 
civilian infrastructure were damaged. UNHCR and local NGO partners responded with urgent emergency assistance to impacted families. © UNHCR/Dmytro Babenko 
2026 RESPONSE in NUMBERS*: 
 
 
OPERATIONAL CONTEXT & HIGHLIGHTS: 
• The Russian Federation  has significantly intensified aerial attacks against 
Ukraine, with Kyiv and other cities subjected to multiple large-scale strikes. 
The UN HRMMU reported that civilian casualties in Ukraine were higher in 
June 2026 than in any other month since April 2022,  with a t least 293 
civilians killed and 1,990 injured . This  concerning trend appears to be 
continuing into July. A massive attack on Kyiv overnight on 1-2 July killed 31 
people. Only a few days later, another attack on 5-6 July killed 19 people in 
Kyiv city and ten  people in the Kyiv region.  So far this year, Russian Armed 
Forces launched over 520 ballistic missiles at Ukraine, more than twice as 
many as in the same period in 2025, according to Ukraine air force data.  
• The Ukraine Recovery Conference (URC)  took place in Gdańsk, Poland, on 
25 and 26 June. UNHCR’s Representative Bernadette Castel -Hollingsworth 
attended, joining key discussions w ith partners, UN agencies and  
Government counterparts. The Representative also spoke at a side event on 
recovery and future returns of displaced Ukrainians  – highlighting the need 
for people-centered investments in housing, jobs and services in Ukraine. 
• Marking the 75th anniversary of the 1951 Refugee Convention and the 65 th 
anniversary of the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness – and 
ahead of World Refugee Day in June – UNHCR together with the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs launched  a photo exhibition in Kyiv  highlighting the 
stories of refugees and stateless people in Ukraine. Read more here.  
• In the fifth year since the start of the Russian full-scale invasion of Ukraine, 
and more than 12 years since the war began,  UNHCR’s programme in 
Ukraine increasingly aims to help war-affected people and communities to 
recover, and displaced people to find durable solutions, particularly through 
housing and strategic protection advocacy. 
WORKING WITH PARTNERS: 
10.8 
million 
people in need 
of humanitarian 
assistance and 
protection in 
2026 
(source: 
2026 HNRP) 
3.6 
million 
people prioritised 
(from 4.1M) for 
humanitarian 
assistance in the 
2026 HNRP
 
2.1 
million 
multi-sectorial 
services UNHCR aims 
to provide to 
internally displaced, 
returnees, and war-
affected people in 
2026*** 
1.25  
million 
multi-sectorial 
services delivered to 
people in need in 
2025*** (in addition to 
1.7M in 2024, 4.3M in 
2022 & 2.6M in 2023) 
 
All sectorial achievements/targets refer to individuals. 
All reached figures are subject to data cleaning and verification.  
The Mid-Year Review Process is ongoing and retro-active 
corrections may occur. 
(Delivered with partners from 1 January–30 June 2026)
Emergency Response    
• Emergency r esponse to attacks:  Complementing the 
work of first responders, UNHCR’s local NGO partners 
continue to provide critical emergency shelter materials 
to people affected by Russian aerial attacks to quickly 
protect their damaged homes. UNHCR and partners also 
provide psychosocial support, legal assistance , for 
example to restore lost documents or apply for state 
compensation, and cash assistance or essential items to 
help cover immediate needs. In June, UNHCR and NGO 
partners delivered emergency shelter materials to 
16,449 people ( 9,086 families) across Ukraine. In the 
first half of  2026, 79,985 people (45,097 families) 
received emergency shelter assistance – 60.4% are 
women and girls, and 41. 2% are older people over the 
age of 60. Most of the emergency shelter support so far 
this year  was provided to households  in 
Dnipropetrovska (27%), Donetska (18%), Zaporizka 
(15%), Sumska (15%), Kharkivksa (9%), Kyivska (6%) and 
Khersonska (6%) oblasts. In addition, UNHCR  has 
provided emergency shelter assistance to 612 damaged 
facilities so far this year , including medical facilities, 
schools, and administrative or heritage buildings, 
allowing them to remain operational while more durable 
repairs can take place . Among others, this includes 
emergency shelter kits provided through UNHCR’s 
NGO partner Rokada to restore the roof of the Kyiv 
Pechersk Lavra following the attack on 15 June. 
• In response to the largescale attacks on Kyiv just days 
apart on 2 July and 6 July , UNHCR and partners 
supported around 890  families and nine facilities with 
emergency shelter repair materials, over 350 people 
received psychosocial support, and around  280 people 
have so far received legal aid to support access to state 
compensation or restore lost documents , in addition to 
various other social consultations. 
• Evacuations and response : UNHCR and partners 
continue to respond to people forcibly  displaced and 
evacuated from frontline regions. Since the start of 
2026, 71,300 evacuees, including almost 2,900 people 
with a disability, have passed through UNHCR -
supported transit centres  (TCs), but the actual number 
of people displaced is substantially higher, as many flee 
without seeking support at the transit facilities. In June, 
around 15,200 IDPs passed through TCs – more than 
any month this year –  51% were women and girls, and 
37% older people above the age of 60 . The  majority 
were displaced  from Donetska oblast , and 40% passed 
through the Lozova TC in Kharkivska oblast . This is an 
increase compared to  April and May, during which  
around 11,000 people passed through the TCs  each 
month. UNHCR and NGO partners are supporting newly 
evacuated and war -affected families  with essential 
items, emergency shelter materials, cash assistance, and 
legal and psychosocial support.
    
 
 
 
 
 
RESPONSE AT A GLANCE (Delivered with partners from 1 January-30 June 2026) 
“I thought there would be no support available because I am not the owner 
of the house. The assistance and legal consultation gave me hope that I 
can resolve these issues”, Serhii says. © UNHCR/Yaroslava Dubrovska 
 
 
Earlier this year, Serhii’s home in Kryvyi Rih, Dnipropetrovska oblast, was 
damaged during a drone attack. Several windows and his entrance door were 
destroyed. Immediately after the attack, UNHCR’s local NGO partner 
Proliska provided emergency shelter materials to help temporarily cover the 
damaged windows and protect the house. Later, Serhii was informed that he 
was not eligible for state compensation for his damaged home because he 
was not the legal owner of the house. This was due to unresolved inheritance 
issues following the passing of his wife. UNHCR’s local  NGO partner Right 
to Protection then registered Serhii to receive  cash assistance and 
documented the damage to his home. He received the cash assistance within 
two weeks, which enabled him to partially cover the cost of replacing the 
damaged windows so he could stay in his home. In addition, Serhii is receiving 
legal counselling to help him navigate inheritance procedures, which may 
help him become eligible for state support in the future,
 among others. 
 
How emergency shelter materials, cash assistance and legal 
aid provide critical complementary support after attacks 
Age, gender and disability breakdown
Protection 
• New State Strategy on Internal Displacement : On 10 
June, in a milestone decision, the Cabinet of Ministers 
adopted the new five -year State Strategy on Internal 
Displacement (2026 to 2030) and its  Operational Action 
Plan. The strategy reflects the Government’s 
commitment to transition to a systematic policy on 
internal displacement and a comprehensive approach to 
supporting IDPs across Ukraine. In an important step 
toward strengthening and enabling implementation of 
the strategy, law No. 12301 on Ensuring the Rights and 
Freedoms of IDPs , adopted on 1 July, provides the 
updated legal and normative framework needed to 
operationalize the strategy’s objectives. Advocacy and 
support for the development of  this State Strategy in 
close cooperation with the Government has been a focus 
of UNHCR’s work over the past year as part of the UN 
Durable Solutions Initiative led by the UN Resident 
Coordinator. For more information, read UNHCR’s Policy 
Brief here. In addition, among a series of newly adopted 
resolutions to advance solutions for displaced people, 
UNHCR supported the development of the mechanism 
related to  Resolution 751  (adopted 10 June) which 
introduces a new purchase modality to expand municipal 
housing stock for IDPs in rural areas. 
• Helpline trends: In the first half of the year, UNHCR’s 
Helpline, operated by NGO partner Donbas SOS 
received around 70,000 calls, responding to people’s 
questions and providing information on support services. 
In 2026, around 78% of callers were women and girls and 
43% were older people. Around 57% of callers were 
IDPs, and 22%  reported having a disability or serious 
medical condition. Calls were received from across the 
country, with Dnipropetrovska, Kharkivska, Kyivska, 
Sumska and Zaporizka oblasts being the top five regions 
with the most callers. The large majority of inquiries 
(86%) related to cash assistance. In total since 2022, the 
UNHCR-supported helpline has addressed over 1 million 
calls, responding to an average of over 750 calls daily. 
 
 Cash Assistance  
• From January-June, UNHCR delivered cash assistance to 
86,820 war-affected people (65% are women and girls, 
and 35% older people), totalling over $22.8 million. 
• Through the Unified Cash transfer (UCT) approach 
adopted in April, and in alignment with the four strategic 
priorities set out in the 2026 HNRP , UNHCR continues 
to assist vulnerable IDPs, returnees and other vulnerable 
war-affected people with cash assistance to enable them 
to meet their basic needs. UNHCR’s primary operational 
focus remains on supporting households affected by 
evacuation or new displacement (UCT2) and individuals 
impacted by strikes (UCT3). In June, UNHCR's cash 
assistance remained highly shock responsive. Around 
76% of individuals assisted received emergency cash 
following evacuation or new displacement (UCT2), while 
around 18% received the cash after being affected by 
strikes (UCT3).  The remaining were assisted through 
other cash interventions based on assessed needs. 
 
 
 
76-year-old Liubov from Dobropillia, Donetska oblast, was evacuated by 
humanitarian volunteers In June 2025 as the security situation in her 
hometown deteriorated sharply.  “It became impossible to stay,” she 
recalls. “Every night we had to run to the basement. During the day, it 
was dangerous to even walk outside.”  After leaving Dobropillia, Liubov 
first arrived in a transit centre in Pavlohrad in Dnipropetrovsk a oblast in 
eastern Ukraine, where she and other evacuees were registered and 
received initial su pport. To cater to her needs for specialized care, she 
was then relocated to a crisis social services centre in Khmelnytskyi in 
central Ukraine that assists and provides accommodation to people who 
are left alone in difficult life circumstances, including vulnerable displaced 
people with disabilities.  Like many older people displaced by the war, 
Liubov relies on her modest pension and humanitarian assistance, which 
is not enough to cover her basic expenses. Cash assistance from UNHCR 
is crucial in helping to bridge this gap. Read more here.
 
 
Cash assistance in Ukraine provides a crucial lifeline 
for displaced people 
For Liubov, UNHCR’s cash assistance has been a crucial lifeline to make 
ends meet in displacement. It enables her to cover her needs, particularly 
her medical expenses. © UNHCR/Alina Kovalenko 
The integration hub is the largest in the country and will provide a range of free 
protection and inclusion services to IDPs, refugees, asylum-seekers, stateless 
persons and host communities. © Rokada 
 
 
The largest Integration Hub in Ukraine  was inaugurated in Kyiv on 17 
June together with  the Mayor of Kyiv, NGO Rokada and UNHCR . 
Developed by the Kyiv City Centre for Comprehensive Assistance to 
IDPs, with support from the Kyiv City State Administration, UNHCR and 
its local NGO partner Rokada, the Hub will provide free integrated 
protection and inclusion services for IDPs , refugees, asylum -seekers, 
stateless persons and host communities.  The building renovation works 
were carried out by the City Administration, while UNHCR and Rokada 
helped develop the concept and design of the hub , in addition to 
providing equipment, furniture and an elevator to ensure accessibility for 
people with limited mobility. The Hub will provide individual counselling 
services, legal and psychological support, guidance on social services, as 
well as educational courses, creative workshops, and recreational 
activities, with continued support from Rokada. 
New Integration Hub in Kyiv will provide critical 
support services to displaced people
CLUSTER RESPONSE UPDATE: Q2 2026.  
UNHCR’s humanitarian response is aligned with the needs and priorities set out in the Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and 
Response Plan (HNRP) . As part of the interagency response in 2026, UNHCR continues to lead the Protection and  
Shelter/NFI Clusters, coordinating the protection, shelter and site coordination and management response by humanitarian 
partners in Ukraine. UNHCR also remains actively engaged in the 2025- 2029 UN Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework (UNSDCF), which will support the Government of Ukraine in its reform, recovery and development priorities, 
and co -leads, with UNDP, Results Group 4 on Governance.  In addition, UN HCR actively engages in the Government’s 
Sectoral Working Group (SWG) on Social Protection , where it cofacilitates the Social Services Task Force and actively 
engages in the Nexus Task Force. UNHCR is also part of the Durable Solutions Initiative led by the UN Resident Coordinator. 
 
PROTECTION CLUSTER  
The Protection Cluster coordinates nearly 200 partners across three coordination hubs. In 2026, Protection Cluster partners aim to reach 
2.4 million people with protection services and assistance (2 million people prioritized under the 2026 HNRP). 
• Evacuations: Following the issuance of the Law 4779 -IX on Evacuations, the Protection Cluster developed Operational 
Considerations for Humanitarian Organizations and organized sessions on the law and its implications with local partners 
conducting evacuations and within broader humanitarian fora (ICCG, NGO Platform). The Cluster also participated in the 
meeting organized by the Ministry of Social Policy , Family and Unity  concerning the Law 4779- IX on evacuations , 
advocating for a more holistic approach to law implementation and by-laws development.  
• Winter preparedness: The Protection Cluster contributed to the ongoing development of the 2026 –2027 Humanitarian 
Winter Response Plan based on the lessons learned from the 2025 –2026 winter response  – promoting a community-
based protection approach to complement state social services and sectoral winter assistance by strengthening 
information provision, community outreach, identification and referral of vulnerable individuals, and support to social 
workers. The proposed approach focuses on reaching people at heightened protection risk who may otherwise fall through 
gaps in existing response mechanisms, including older people, persons with disabilities, and single caregivers. 
• Collective site monitoring: In April, the Protection Cluster, jointly with REACH and Cluster partners, completed the 20th 
round of the national multisectoral collective site monitoring , an exercise funded by UNHCR. More than 1,300 collective 
sites were assessed, hosting approximately 61,000 people, including 39% older people and 16% children. Of these, around 
11,000 were newly displaced people who had arrived within the previous six months. Partners identified more than 2,600 
available rooms that could accommodate newly displaced people, including over 700 rooms suitable for people with limited 
mobility. Notably, 16% of collective sites were providing the state social service Prytulok  ("Shelter") for people with 
disabilities in line with Resolution No. 1169. Protection Cluster Sub-National Coordinators are following up on the findings. 
• Transit Centres: Between April and June (Q2), more than 37,500 people passed through Transit Centres , representing a 
12% increase compared to Q1. More than half of all evacuees (20,240 people) came from Donetska oblast, while the 
number of people evacuated from Dnipropetrovska and Zaporizka oblasts declined slightly. The Transit Centre  in Lozova 
continued to handle the highest number of arrivals, with more than 17,000 people passing through during the reporting 
period. As in previous reporting periods, around 89% of people continued their onward movement independently, while 
11% required assistance either to board the evacuation train or to access accommodation in a collective site. 
• HNRP reporting: P artners completed the first round of reporting under the 2026 issue -based HNRP. Between January 
and March, nearly 200 organizations provided protection assistance (including child protection and GBV services) to 
approximately 780,000 people nationwide. The  most frequently delivered services included life- saving information 
provision, psychosocial support, legal assistance and individual protection assistance, including transportation. Of all 
people reached, 34.8% were assisted under Strateg ic Priority (SP) 1 (frontline response), 31.9% under SP  4 (support to 
vulnerable groups in protracted displacement), 23.5% under SP  3 (response to strikes), and 11.6% under SP  2 (new 
displacement response). The response reached almost equal numbers of non-displaced people (51.1%) and IDPs (48.9%). 
• Protection Risk Monitoring System: The Protection Cluster continued the implementation of the Protection Risk 
Monitoring System (PRMS), which expands on the former Protection Monitoring Tool. Following the development of tools 
in Q1, the Protection Cluster conducted field -level training sessions for partners in Odesa, Mykolaiv, Kharkiv, Dnipro, 
Sumy, Lviv, and Kyiv. The first round of data collection was completed in late May and is analysing findings. 
• Protection case management: The Cluster continued to support the rollout of the Protection Case Management 
Information Management System Plus (PCMIMS+), led by IRC, to strengthen harmonized, safe, and structured protection 
case management across organizations while promoting consistent risk-based intake criteria and data protection standards. 
In partnership with DRC and the Protection Cluster, IRC delivered the first three-day national training in Kyiv on PCMIMS+. 
• Cash for Protection Training: In April, the Protection Cluster, jointly with the Global Protection Cluster Cash for Protection 
Task Team, organized a five -day Cash for Protection (C4P) training in Kyiv for more than 30 participants. The training 
strengthened partners' capacity to desi gn, implement, and monitor C4P programmes, with a strong focus on practical 
application and peer learning. It also supported organizations participating in the pilot implementation of the integrated 
C4P guidance, with lessons learned to inform the further refinement of operational guidance and tools later this year. 
• On Accountability to Affected People, UNHCR, on behalf of the Protection Cluster, presented 'Feedback trends of 
Affected People in the Ukraine Humanitarian Response (2025-2026)’ at the HCT meeting held on 17 June.
SHELTER/NFI CLUSTER  
The Shelter and NFI Cluster co ordinates 155 partners across four coordination hubs. In 2026, Cluster partners aim to reach 1.4 million  
people with emergency shelter and NFI assistance, winter assistance, and adequate housing (1.2 million people prioritized). 
• Response reach: In the first half of 2026, Shelter/NFI Cluster partners continued to provide emergency and recovery -
oriented shelter assistance to people affected by hostilities, displacement, evacuations and strikes across Ukraine. Overall, 
partners reported 445,557 peop le reached/items delivered under Shelter/NFI indicators between January and June. 
During Q2 alone, 35 organi zations reached 79,674 people across 16 oblasts and supported 40 institutions.  Assistance in 
Q2 reached both internally displaced and non-displaced war-affected people. IDPs represented 60.2% of people reached, 
while 39.8% were non-displaced. Women and girls accounted for 64% of people reached, and older people represented a 
significant share at 40%, confirming the continued need for vulnerability-based targeting. 
• Emergency NFI and shelter support remained the largest area of delivery: From January to June, partners reached 83,138 
people with household NFIs and 164,944 people with communal NFI support in collective sites, transit centres, invincibility 
points and bomb shelters. Emergency shelter support also remained significant, reaching 92,086 people in 2026 to date, 
including 75,269 people with emergency construction materials and 16,817 people with emergency shelter kits. In Q2, 
this included 17,141 people supported with hous ehold NFIs, 30,880 people reached with communal NFI donations, and 
over 54,100 people supported with emergency shelter kits or construction materials. 
• Humanitarian repairs and safer living conditions : In 2026 to date, 40,429 people were supported under humanitarian 
repair activities, including light, medium and heavy repairs, common space repairs and support to social facilities. This 
included 22,551 people supported by repairs to social facilities, 7,819 people with in-kind light repairs, 4,127 with in-kind 
medium repairs, and 3,502 with light repairs using cash or vouchers. In Q2, repair support remained an important part of 
the response, particularly light and medium repairs, common space repairs and assistance to social facilities. 
• Support to collective sites and temporary accommodation : Between January and June, 18,514 people were supported 
under collective site refurbishment activities, including 16,972 people benefiting from refurbishment activities and 1,542 
from care and maintenance support. Rental support reached 3,351 people in 2026 to date, including 1,807 people in Q2, 
helping displaced households access temporary accommodation options. 
• Winter-related assistance and preparedness: In the first half of 2026, as part of the 2025-2026 winter response, partners 
reached 76,370 people with winter heating support, including 49,027 people with winter energy cash or vouchers, 16,596 
with cash for utilities, 7,980 with in -kind winter energy, and 2,767 with winter heating appliances. Partners also reached 
13,403 people with personal insulation support, mainly winter NFIs and winter clothes, and 5,904 people with shelter 
insulation for substandard houses. 
• Coordination & operational readiness: The Cluster organized a Humanitarian Repairs Workshop, where partners discussed 
practical repair challenges, operational bottlenecks and field -tested solutions. The Cluster also completed the winter 
lessons learned process, established a Winter SOPs Technical Working Group, and published the 2026 Activities Handbook 
and Winterization Lessons Learned. Hub coordination continued to support emergency readiness, partner stock mapping, 
and reporting in ActivityInfo and SIDAR. Looking ahead, priorities include maintaining rapid emergency response capacity, 
strengthening the repair pipeline before winter, s upporting collective sites and temporary accommodation options, and 
keeping older people, IDPs, female-headed households and other vulnerable groups at the centre of the response.
  
 
 
 
 
 
UNHCR is grateful for the support from our top government donors and for the generous contributions from individuals and the 
private sector. Given the immense humanitarian needs, UNHCR continues to seek support to deliver assistance inside Ukraine. 
For more information, see the UNHCR Ukraine Situation Appeal 2026 and the UNHCR Ukraine 2026 Programme Summary. 
 
FOR MORE INFORMATION: 
 Visit Ukraine’s Operational Data Portal for more information products here. 
 UNHCR’s Regional Flash Update on the Ukraine situation can be found here. 
 Ukraine Protection Cluster Response Dashboard can be found here. 
 Ukraine Protection Cluster Transit Centres Tracker here. 
 Shelter Cluster Response Dashboard here. 
 
 
CONTACTS: 
 Livia das Neves, Senior External Relations Officer, 
dasneves@unhcr.org 
 Alessia Pignatti, Reporting Officer, 
pignatti@unhcr.org 
 
UNHCR Ukraine Page
      X
         Facebook
      Telegram 
 
Contact UNHCR’s Hotline 0-800-307-711 for 
feedback and advice on assistance and services.