1 
 * IASC Principals will stand up ad-hoc, time-bound advice groups on defined questions. 
 
Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) 
 Humanitarian Reset Roadmap 
21 October 2025 
Vision: A humanitarian system that is locally led and globally supported, rooted in communities and driven by greatest need. We will 
uphold principles, defend humanitarian space, and put protection — especially of women and girls — at the center. By reducing 
duplication and bureaucracy, ending turf wars, and transitioning to locally led response, we will deliver faster, fairer, and  more 
accountable humanitarian action. 
 
DEFINE – Focus on Greatest Needs 
Cut through bureaucracy to ensure that scarce resources reach people in most severe need guided by evidence and 
streamlined planning. 
Action Timeline Lead Status 
1. Hyper-prioritized Global Humanitarian Overview (GHO), focused on 114 
million people most in need in 2025. 
Q1 2025 HPC-SG Delivered 
2. Embed resilience-building and planned transitions out of humanitarian 
action into all operations, including via joint analysis/planning 
approaches. 
Ongoing EDG Scale-up 
3. Hyper-prioritized GHO focused on those most in need 2026. Q4 2025 HWG/ HPC-SG Progressing 
4. Reprioritise 20 country plans (+25% reduction) and transition out of 8 
operations. 
Q2 2026 EDG Progressing 
5. Simplify planning and appeals, rooted in communities’ priorities - 
sharply reducing process for operational partners. 
Q4 2025 HPC-SG Progressing 
6. Institutionalise community consultations to deﬁne collective priorities. Q1 2026 HWG Scale-up 
DELIVER – Timely & Streamlined Response 
Reform coordination to be lighter, inclusive, and context-speciﬁc, enabling timely and efficient response.  
7. Coordinated and principled humanitarian action, with protection and the 
rights of women and girls at the center — under the strategic leadership 
of HCs/HCTs and backed by pooled and other funding. 
Q4 2025 HCs/ HCTs Scale-up 
8. Accountability to crisis-affected people — including women and girls 
survivors of sexual violence — by increasing their participation and 
directing more funding to women-led organisations. 
Q1 2026 HCs/ HCTs Scale-up 
9. Scale-up multi-purpose cash assistance wherever feasible and 
appropriate, with local actors fully involved. 
Q2 2026  IASC* Scale-up 
10. Streamline clusters (from 11 and 4 AoRs to 8) - with HCs/HCTs 
activating only those needed (if any), enabling local actors to co-lead 
where possible, and reviewing options for further reduction. 
Q4 2025 HWG Progressing 
11. Greater integration between cluster and refugee coordination models, 
[working towards one humanitarian coordination model]. 
Q4 2025 UNHCR/OCHA Progressing 
12. Streamline IASC structures by reducing layers and meetings. Sept 2025 ERC / IASC Delivered 
DEVOLVE – People-Centered 
Shift decision-making, resources, and accountability to affected communities and local actors as the drivers of 
humanitarian response. 
13. Empower leaders in country, with HCTs and HCs operating as strategic, 
uniﬁed crisis platforms, with stronger accountability and performance 
management. 
Q4 2025 IASC/EDG Scale-up
2 
 * IASC Principals will stand up ad-hoc, time-bound advice groups on defined questions. 
14. HCs/HCTs to be held accountable on delivering against priorities 
identiﬁed by affected people, agreed through a consultation and 
validation process. 
Q1 2026 HCs/ HCTs Scale-up 
15. HCs and HCTs to opt for context-speciﬁc coordination models built 
around the needs, priorities and capacities of communities (including 
using ABC, streamlined clusters, or other approaches), with leadership 
by local actors where possible. 
Q4 2025 HCs/ HCTs Scale-up 
16. Commit UN and INGOs to more equitable partnerships with local and 
national actors, based on trust and recognition and coordinated 
institutional capacity strengthening, and reflect this in HCT practice and 
partner engagement. 
Q1 2026 HCs/ HCTs Scale-up 
17. Operationalize the Reset principle of “as local as possible, as 
international as necessary” by embedding local leadership, 
representation, financing, and measurable localization targets across all 
levels of humanitarian action. 
Q1 2026 HCs/ HCTs Scale-up 
18. Signiﬁcantly increase funding to country pooled funds, with ERC 
aspiration of 70% of pooled funding channelled to local actors, 
including women-led organisations. Strengthen the pooled funds to 
deliver at a more ambitious level. 
Q3 2026 
 
ERC Scale-up 
DEFEND – Principles & Humanitarian Space 
Uphold humanitarian principles, protect space for action, and advocate collectively for those most at risk. 
19. Unequivocally uphold humanitarian principles and consistent 
application of International Humanitarian Law (IHL). 
Ongoing ERC/IASC Ongoing 
20. Consistent messaging and protection of our collective work on gender, 
and against sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEA/SH). 
Ongoing ERC/IASC Ongoing 
21. Shared advocacy for protection of civilians & humanitarian workers. Ongoing ERC/IASC Ongoing 
22. Protect space for agile and creative humanitarian diplomacy. Ongoing UN80 Progressing 
23. Launch campaigns to connect with publics, parliaments, and private 
actors — making the case afresh for humanitarian solidarity, with 
nations beyond governments aiming to deliver 1% for those in dire. 
Ongoing ERC/IASC Ongoing 
ENABLERS – Partnerships, Resources & Efﬁciency 
Unlock transformation through innovation, broader ﬁnancing, and streamlined systems.  
24. Sustain engagement to bring in new partners and sources of finance.  Ongoing DG Ongoing 
25. Bring together scaled up anticipatory action and a ‘green humanitarian 
reset’ that is ready for the climate challenges ahead. 
Ongoing  IASC* Ongoing 
26. Increase advocacy with development actors and International Financial 
Institutions (IFIs) on resilience building and root causes of crises. 
Ongoing DG Ongoing 
27. Work with donors to reduce conditionality and reporting requirements, 
step up to the quid pro quo of the Grand Bargain, and provide 
predictable, flexible funding. 
Ongoing Grand Bargain Scale-up 
28. Shared services by the UN or others by default (including coordination, 
needs assessments, risk management, pooled data systems and 
information management, back-ofﬁce support, supply chains, 
communication, premises and logistics). 
Oct 2025 UN80 in 
collaboration 
with IASC 
Progressing 
29. Innovate so that tech/AI is part of the solution. Q4 2025  IASC* Planned 
30. Deﬁne unique roles & value of UN, INGOs, LNAs to ensure 
complementarity. 
Q4 2025 IASC*  Planned
3 
 * IASC Principals will stand up ad-hoc, time-bound advice groups on defined questions.