The latest strike, which the United States said had been carried out as part of its blockade enforcement operations, involved the Palau-flagged tanker MT Settebello near the coast of Oman.
Tit-for-tat strikes by the US and Iran following the apparent suspension of negotiations to end the war threaten to accelerate, with President Trump on social media promising to hit Iran “very hard” and “assume total control of their oil and gas markets.”
The UN Secretary-General is “deeply concerned” by the continuing escalation
, his spokesperson said in a 
statement
 on Thursday.
António Guterres urged all parties to return to the full implementation of the ceasefire and warned that any further deterioration could trigger “
a full resumption of the conflict, with unpredictable consequences for the region and the world, especially the most vulnerable countries.
”






© NASA/GSFC/Jacques Descloitres


The Strait of Hormuz is a narrow but vital shipping route linking the Persian Gulf to the Gulf of Oman and the wider Arabian Sea. It lies between Iran to the north and Oman and UAE to the south.






Attacks ‘simply unacceptable’
According to UN maritime agency, the latest incident brings the number of confirmed seafarer fatalities to 14 since the crisis began on 28 February. The agency has 
verified 46 attacks on international shipping in and around the Strait of Hormuz
 during that period.
International Maritime Organization
 (IMO) Secretary-General Arsenio Dominguez strongly condemned the attack, calling them “
simply unacceptable.
”
“
I strongly condemn any act from any party that endangers the lives of seafarers and the safety of international shipping,
” he said.
Under pressure
Beyond the immediate loss of life, the UN maritime agency warns that thousands of civilian seafarers remain exposed to mounting risks.
Across the wider Gulf region, 
roughly 20,000 seafarers are estimated to remain aboard commercial and offshore vessels
. IMO says many are operating under sustained security threats and severe psychological pressure, while some crews remain detained by parties to the conflict.






© IFAD/Ibrahima Kebe Diallo


Communities in developing countries are particularly vulnerable to rising food prices and supply disruptions. (file photo)






‘A global food security risk’
While the Strait of Hormuz is often viewed through the lens of energy markets, the consequences of an uptick in fighting extend far beyond oil.
Earlier this week, UN Food and Agriculture Organization Director-General Qu Dongyu said 
the closure and disruption of the waterway represented “a global food security risk.”
Around 35 per cent of global crude oil exports, 20 per cent of liquefied natural gas (LNG) exports, between 20 and 30 per cent of global fertilizer exports and roughly half of global sulphur exports pass through the narrow maritime corridor, he noted.
“
These flows are essential for global food production,
” Mr. Qu said.
The greatest danger, 
FAO
 warned at the outset of the crisis, was not an immediate shortage of food but a “delayed shock” to fertilizer supplies and agricultural production.
One hundred days later, those concerns are becoming increasingly visible. Farmers across Africa, Asia and Latin America are facing higher production costs and difficult decisions over fertilizer use, crop choices and investment.
This could translate into weaker harvests and higher food prices in the months ahead.
Food prices begin to climb
Signs of that pressure are already emerging. FAO reported that its cereal price index rose 2.6 per cent in May compared with April and was 
nearly five per cent higher than a year earlier
.
Wheat prices increased 3.4 per cent month-on-month
 and 7.8 per cent compared with May 2025, while rice prices rose 2.7 per cent.
The agency has urged governments to keep trade open, avoid export restrictions on agricultural inputs, protect food corridors and secure alternative logistics routes. It is also promoting 
more efficient fertilizer use
, precision agriculture and alternative products.






© WFP/Logistics Cluster


Status of transport routes, ports and airports in the Middle East region. Data as of 25 May 2026.






Aid workers also impacted
According to a logistics bulletin from the UN World Food Programme (
WFP
) in late May, the crisis has disrupted regional transport corridors, ports, airspace, border crossings and fuel supply chains across the Middle East and beyond.
The effects are being 
felt particularly in Afghanistan, Lebanon, the occupied Palestinian territory, Syria, Yemen and of course Iran
, while disruptions are also spilling into humanitarian operations in East Africa.
Fuel prices have risen sharply in several countries. Since the crisis began, diesel prices have increased by more than 62 per cent in Lebanon and 44 per cent in Yemen, while gasoline prices have climbed by more than 60 per cent in Pakistan.
A crisis with global consequences
More than 100 days after hostilities began, disruptions in the strait continue to reverberate with economic and humanitarian consequences far beyond the Middle East – affecting commercial shipping routes, aid corridors, farms, food markets, fuel prices and households around the world.
On Thursday, Secretary-General Guterres once again urged 
all parties to return to the full implementation of the ceasefire and avoid any further deterioration
 – 
reiterating the call he made yesterday
 at a high-level 
Security Council
 meeting.
“
The only way forward is through genuine dialogue and negotiations,
” he said, calling on the US and Iran to “redouble their efforts towards a peaceful, comprehensive and durable agreement that advances regional and international peace and security.”