05/06/2026 - 11:22
Palestinian teenager killed by Israeli army in West Bank (Palestinian Authority)


 A young Palestinian was killed Friday by Israeli gunfire in the central West Bank, the Palestinian Authority announced, while the Israeli military said it had shot and killed a person who was throwing Molotov cocktails at Israeli vehicles.
Haitham Ezzedine Omar Hamida, 18, was killed shortly after midnight “by bullets fired by the occupation [Israel] in the village of Beitin,” near Ramallah, according to a brief statement from the Palestinian Ministry of Health, which noted that his body is being held by Israel, as is often the case.






05/06/2026 - 10:59
WPF warns Middle East conflict pushing millions into hunger


The Middle East ​conflict is pushing millions of people closer to hunger, as rising fuel and transport costs  drive up food prices while funding shortfalls force aid agencies to scale back assistance, the U.N. World Food Programme said on Friday.
Joint U.S.-Israeli strikes on Iran in February triggered ​a regional ‌conflict stretching across the Gulf and into Lebanon, disrupting key ⁠shipping routes, including the Strait of Hormuz, forcing vessels to reroute and sharply constraining global energy flows and supply ‌chains.
In March, the WFP forecast as many as 45 million people ⁠could fall into acute food insecurity if oil prices remained around $100 per barrel through June.






05/06/2026 - 10:37
UN doubles its call for Lebanon aid as humanitarian crisis deteriorates


The UN on Friday more than doubled its aid appeal for Lebanon as the country reels from Israel's war against Iran-backed Hezbollah, saying nearly $640 million was needed over six months. 
"The humanitarian crisis in Lebanon is severe and deteriorating," the UN humanitarian agency OCHA said in a revised appeal for the country.
"Repeated displacements, insufficient shelter capacity and limited prospects for safe return are deepening vulnerability," it said, warning that "affected people are rapidly exhausting their coping capacities, and essential services are under increasing strain".
The UN had appealed for $308 million in March to support a massive emergency response led by Lebanon's government through to the end of May.






05/06/2026 - 10:12
Israel announces imminent strikes against Hezbollah in the town of Sarafand


The Israeli military announced late Friday morning that it was preparing to carry out strikes it claimed were targeting the Islamist group Hezbollah in the coastal town of Sarafand, in southern Lebanon, despite the new ceasefire agreement announced by Washington.
Colonel Avichay Adraee, the Israeli army’s Arabic-speaking spokesperson, called on residents to evacuate this town located between the cities of Tyre and Saida, as well as six other localities, following a similar call earlier that morning for three villages.
"Out of concern for your safety, you must evacuate your homes immediately and move north of the Zahrani River," which runs some 40 kilometres (25 miles) north of the border.






05/06/2026 - 09:35
Israel army warns will attack 3 villages north of Lebanon's Litani River


Israel's military warned residents of three villages north of the Litani River in southern Lebanon to evacuate on Friday ahead of expected attacks against Iran-backed Hezbollah.
"For your safety, you must evacuate your homes immediately and move away from the villages and towns by at least 1,000 metres into open areas. Anyone who is near Hezbollah operatives, their facilities, or their weapons endangers their life!" the army's Arabic-language spokesman Avichay Adraee posted on X.
Hezbollah chief Naim Qassem on Thursday rejected a conditional truce announced by Lebanese and Israeli envoys, demanding a comprehensive ceasefire and full Israeli withdrawal instead as he threatened northern Israel with new attacks.






05/06/2026 - 09:26
Israeli strikes kill 7 in south Lebanon's Tyre, civil defence


Israeli strikes overnight in the south Lebanon city of Tyre killed seven people, a source from Lebanon's civil defence told AFP on Friday, despite a ceasefire in the Israel-Hezbollah war.
One strike near the Jabal Amel hospital killed four people, wounded seven and lightly damaged the facility, while another elsewhere in the city killed three and wounded five, including two children.






05/06/2026 - 09:26
UN nuclear watchdog says it's been unable to inspect Iranian facilities


The UN nuclear watchdog has been unable to inspect nuclear facilities in Iran affected by the war last June according to a confidential report by The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) circulated to member states and seen Thursday by The Associated Press.
The IAEA reported that it “cannot provide any information on the current size, composition or whereabouts of the stockpile of enriched uranium in Iran or whether Iran has suspended all enrichment-related activities.”
The organisation was “unable to discharge its safeguards responsibilities” that it has under the Safeguards Agreement of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, adding that it is “indispensable and urgent” for Tehran to implement its obligations under that Treaty.
The only nuclear facility inspected in Iran by IAEA inspectors since the last report in February has been the Bushehr nuclear power plant, which was visited on June 1-3. The reactor currently running at Bushehr uses uranium from Russia enriched to 4.5%, a low level needed for power generation in such plants.






05/06/2026 - 09:24
At least 10 people killed in strikes on Gaza, hospitals say


Israeli strikes in Gaza killed at least 10 Palestinians on Thursday, hospitals said.
Nine people were killed in at least four separate strikes overnight in Gaza City, according to Shifa Hospital, which received the bodies. The hospital said the victims included two women and two children.
Another strike in Gaza City on Thursday evening killed at least one person and wounded another, according to Saraya Field Hospital, which is operated by the Red Crescent. 
Footage of one of the strikes showed a massive hole in an upper floor in what appeared to be a residential apartment building. The blast blew holes through interior walls and scattered blood-stained belongings across the room and into the street. 
Israel's military said the overnight strikes in northern Gaza killed four Hamas militants, which it described as senior members of an apparatus responsible for protecting Hamas leaders and providing them with intelligence assessments.






05/06/2026 - 09:22
 
Welcome to the FRANCE 24 liveblog covering events in the Middle East. Click here to catch up on what happened yesterday.