Baroness Chapman announced a new £13m UK humanitarian package to Lebanon to help deliver vital assistance to people affected by the crisis.


On a joint visit to Lebanon with her French and Qatari counterparts, Development Minister Jenny Chapman, concluded a two-day visit to Lebanon, her first as a Minister.


The visit underscored the urgent need for de‑escalation and showed the UK, France and Qatar’s united support for Lebanon and their commitment to delivering humanitarian assistance, in partnership with the Government of Lebanon.


Baroness Chapman announced a new £13m UK humanitarian package to Lebanon to help deliver vital assistance to people affected by the crisis, including the provision of, protection, education, healthcare, food and other basic services. This brings total UK support announced since March to £43 million.


Accompanied by Ambassador Hamish Cowell, Development Minister Chapman and her French and Qatari counterparts Minister Delegate for Francophonie, International Partnerships Éléonore Caroit and Minister of State for International Cooperation Dr. Mariam bint Ali bin Nasser Al-Misnad, met with President Joseph Aoun, Speaker Nabih Berri and Minister of Social Affairs Haneen Sayed, reiterating support for Lebanon’s sovereignty and state institutions.


Development Minister Chapman welcomed recent direct talks between Israel and Lebanon and reiterated support for diplomatic efforts as the best route toward lasting peace, security and stability.


With her French and Qatari counterparts and Minister Haneen Sayed, Baroness Chapman visited UK-funded programmes in Beirut and Saida. At the Grand Serail, she met the Government’s Disaster Risk Management Unit, which alongside the Lebanese Red Cross is leading the nationally coordinated, data-driven response to the humanitarian crisis. She praised the dedication of healthcare workers and first responders, stressing that attacks on those carrying out such vital duties are unacceptable and that all sides must ensure their protection in line with International Humanitarian Law.


They then visited with UNICEF Country Representative Marcoluigi Corsi, a collective shelter in Jnah for families displaced in the recent conflict escalation. Baroness Chapman saw how the UK and partners are supporting the Government-led response in delivering essential education and protection services to displaced children and families in a challenging environment.


In Saida, Baroness Chapman visited Al Murjan High School a collective shelter hosting displaced families, and heard from UKISF partner ABAAD, about Gender Based Violence challenges amidst the conflict. With UKISF support, ABAAD has provided psychological first aid, strengthened shelter safety systems, delivered Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) sessions for women and girls, and more.


With Deputy Special Coordinator and Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator in Lebanon Imran Riza and UNOCHA’s Representative Kristen Knutson, Baroness Chapman joined by French minister Éléonore Caroit, visited a shelter in Saida hosting displaced families and heard about the impact of the humanitarian crisis. She saw first-hand how UK support through the Lebanon Humanitarian Fund is providing water, sanitation, hygiene, protection and food assistance to vulnerable people.


At the Lebanese Red Cross (LRC) centre, Development Minister Chapman and French minister Éléonore Caroit heard about LRC’s frontline role as first responders and the impact of the conflict on south Lebanon. Through the British Red Cross, UK support is strengthening LRC’s crisis preparedness. Minister Chapman handed over 8 UK-funded ambulances to the Red Cross, in the presence of LRC Secretary General George Kettaneh and the British Red Cross.


She later visited a displaced family benefiting from UK support. Through the World Food Programme, the UK is contributing to the Government of Lebanon’s Shock Responsive Social Safety Net that is providing a vital lifeline amidst the ongoing humanitarian crisis.


Minister for Development Jenny Chapman said:




The US-Iran agreement is an important step forward in reducing tensions, supporting regional stability, and reopening vital routes for global trade. Our priority now is to support its implementation and help create the conditions for a lasting peace, including an end to hostilities in Lebanon.






Reckless and disproportionate Israeli escalation in Lebanon must end, as must Hizballah’s attacks on Israel, which have dragged the Lebanese people into yet another conflict they have not chosen.






Here with my partners from France and Qatar, we’ve seen the devastating impact of the conflict. We are coming together to emphasise the importance of delivering stability in the Middle East, and of a robust and lasting ceasefire in Lebanon.






We remain committed to working with the Government of Lebanon to ensure they can deliver the response needed to support stability and resilience.




Ambassador Hamish Cowell said:




Baroness Jenny Chapman’s visit to Lebanon comes at a critical moment, as Lebanon faces the continuing impact of conflict.






We will continue to coordinate with the Government of Lebanon and humanitarian partners.






De-escalation is needed urgently. All parties must respect the ceasefire and uphold international humanitarian law.