United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 
 
Highlights 
 Two consecutive earthquakes of magnitude 7.2 and 7.5 on 24 June (18:00 
local time); authorities report more than 430 aftershocks. 
 At least seven (7) states have been impacted. La Guaira continues to record 
the highest level of impact. 
 Official toll: 1,430 people dead and 3, 238 injured; the figure continues to 
rise. 
 More than 3,100 families resulted displaced. 
 At least 1,423 infrastructures were affected. 
 The response remains focused on search and rescue operations. 
 Urban Search and Rescue (USAR) teams from 27 countries continue to 
arrive in the country and are operating in the most affected areas , in 
coordination with OCHA. 
 The Humanitarian Coordinator, Gianluca Rampolla, conducted an initial visit to La Guaida with 
United Nations agencies to coordinate the response with the authorities. 
 
Situation overview 
Venezuela is facing a national 
emergency following the two 
consecutive high- magnitude 
earthquakes (7.2 and 7.5) of 24 June 
(18:00 local time) in the north- central 
region, with the epicentre off the coast 
some 28– 30 km north -west of 
Montalbán (Carabobo). Authorities 
report more than 430 aftershocks, 
sustaining. In the early hours of 
Saturday, 26 June alone, 20 events 
were recorded, according to local 
media reports, maintaining a high- risk 
conditions. 
 
The official toll stands at 1,430 people 
dead and 3,280 injured. Authorities 
also reported that 3,142 families have  
been displaced. Additionally, as of the afternoon of Friday, 26 June, at least 1,423 infrastructures had been 
reported as affected. Figures remain under review as operations advance. 
 
The Government response in the initial hours has focused on search and rescue, emergency medical care 
and damage assessments. The impact is severe, with the highest concentration in the La Guaira, Capital 
District, Miranda, Carabobo and Yaracuy. The United Nations and its partner organizations are 
coordinating for the next phase of the response. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Situation Report No. 4 
 Earthquakes in Venezuela 
 27 June 2026 
 Time: 3:00 pm 
 
1,430 
3,238
 
Injured 
people 
Dead 
people
OCHA | 2 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
Impact on infrastructure 
 Preliminary estimates indicate direct physical damages amounting to USD 6.7 billion, 
equivalent to 6 per cent of GDP, according to UNDP data. 
 At least eight hospitals are reported to have sustained damages. 
 The J. M. de los Ríos Children’s Hospital (Caracas)  and Coche Hospital sustained structural 
damage, requiring alternatives for the reconstruction or relocation of specialized services. 
 At least 1.423 infrastructures were affected; the collapses are concentrated in La Guaira and 
Greater Caracas. 
 Maiquetía International Airport is closed due to damage, with no commercial flights expected 
until at least 2 July; all other airports in the country remain operational.  
 National ports remain operational. Authorities reported that La Guaira Port will serve as an 
emergency operations hub. 
 Caracas Metro and railways out of operation for technical evaluation.  
 Potable water services are reported to be affected in several states. Supply disruptions have 
been recorded in Miranda, Falcón, Yaracuy and Zulia, as well as in parts of Caracas and La 
Guaira. 
 
National and international response 
 National state of emergency and activation of the Emergency General Staff and the National 
Risk Management and Civil Protection System. 
 An initial fund of US$200 million has been announced for the reconstruction of infrastructure, 
hospitals and housing, along with a complementary fund for the immediate assistance of 
affected populations. 
 Activation of the public and private health network for mass treatment of the injured. 
 
International support: 
 The USAR response operations are ongoing and underway in the field. Teams from 27 
countries, with more than 2,200 personnel and 140 search dogs, have been deployed to locate 
and rescue people and provide initial medical care. Most are already in the country, operating 
in the most affected areas. 
 OCHA is supporting teams directly in the field as they arrive. 
 Other countries (Ireland, Syria) are mobilizing their teams to support the response. 
 The Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean (CAF) announced the creation of 
the Venezuela Recovery and Reconstruction Fund with an initial capital of USD 1 million. The 
mechanism will be used to mobilize public and private resources to support emergency 
response, recovery and reconstruction efforts. 
 The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) has launched 
an Emergency Appeal for 50 million Swiss francs. The funds raised will support the 
Venezuelan Red Cross in assisting 300,000 people. This is in addition to the allocat ion of 2 
million Swiss francs from its Disaster Response Emergency Fund (DREF) and the dispatch of 
an initial 17 tonnes of humanitarian supplies. 
 
Measures adopted 
 An official hotline has been activated to directly report missing persons: 0- 800-RESCATE 
(7372283), as well as the VenApp platform for reporting affected individuals. 
 An official volunteer registration system has been activated to support the response in a 
coordinated manner.  
 At least 60 per cent of electricity services have been restored. 
 Three field hospital tents have been installed, equipped with Intensive Care Units (ICUs), 
treatment rooms and trauma areas. 
 The Ministry of Health has launched blood donation drives through Sunday, 28 June. 
 Suspension of classes and non-essential activities.
OCHA | 3 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 Opening of temporary shelters (e.g., the Macuto baseball stadium in La Guaira and five 
shelters in Caracas). 
 
Situation by state 
Capital District (Caracas) 
 Collapses and critical damage in El Paraíso, San Bernardino and Maripérez. 
 Population sheltering in open spaces following the loss of homes or due to fear of returning to 
damaged structures. 
 Authorities have announced the establishment of two large collection centres: one at La 
Carlota and another at Almacenadora Caracas (Catia). 
 Five shelters opened with capacity for 375 families (75 each): Quinta Crespo, Pinto Salina, El 
Valle, Caricuao and La Vega. 
 The Caracas Metro and railway services remain out of operation. 
 
La Guaira 
 A disaster zone has been declared. The Government restricted access to the state from Friday, 
27 June at 20:00 (local time). 
 The state has been under military control since Friday, 26 June, with more than 14,000 military 
and police personnel deployed to support the response and maintain public health preventive 
measures. 
 Critical conditions persist, with damage to essential infrastructure increasing the vulnerability 
of already affected populations. 
 A temporary shelter has been established at the Macuto baseball stadium. 
 Damage to Maiquetía International Airport has led to the suspension of commercial operations. 
 
Miranda 
 Infrastructure has sustained damage, particularly in Chacao municipality, where three 
buildings have completely collapsed and more than 35 residential buildings are estimated to 
have structural damage. 
 Preventive evacuations are ongoing, with populations sheltering in open spaces (squares and 
parks) following the loss of homes or due to fear of returning to damaged structures. 
 Interruptions to basic services persist in some areas. 
 Three shelters have been established in the state. 
 
Carabobo and Yaracuy (epicentral zone) 
 Severe damage to housing, road infrastructure and services has been reported, including 
cracked roads (e.g. the Morón roundabout) and multiple damaged buildings.  
 
Falcón (Tucacas – Silva municipality) 
 Ongoing search and rescue operations continue at the La Mar Suites Residential Complex in 
Tucacas. The official toll is five people dead and seven missing. 
 The Venezuelan Red Cross is coordinating actions with Civil Protection: it has provided 
personal protective equipment and logistical support for the mobilization of supplies from 
collection centres established near the Coro branch, and deployed the La Vela branch team 
to Tucacas to reinforce operations. 
 The Venezuelan Red Cross has established a field hospital in Tucacas to support emergency 
services at Dr. Lino Arévalo Hospital. 
 In Boca de Aroa, regional authorities confirmed around 70 families affected by structural 
damage to their homes, who were attended by the relevant authorities. 
 The Local Coordination Forum (LCF) in the state is preparing a mapping of capacities and 
resources to support the response led by the authorities. Teams are ready to provide the 
necessary support and remain in coordination.
OCHA | 4 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
Other states 
 In Aragua, the State High Command has been activated. A shelter has been established in 
Maracay.  
 In Zulia, the stoppage of potable water pumping has been reported, resulting in a supply 
interruption in Maracaibo. 
 Power outages have been reported in Barquisimeto (Lara), Mérida (Mérida), San Cristóbal 
(Táchira), Maracay (Aragua) and Margarita (Nueva Esparta). 
Humanitarian coordination 
 The Humanitarian Coordinator conducted an initial visit to La Guaira state on Saturday, 27 
June, together with United Nations agencies, specifically to the USAR central command in the 
country. 
 Together with the authorities, the establishment of multi-service spaces in two strategic 
locations in the state was agreed to advance the response following search and rescue 
operations. 
 Among the key sectors identified for the next phase are: food distribution, health, including 
sexual and reproductive health, protection and its areas of responsibility; and water, sanitation 
and hygiene. 
 Local Forums and Coordination Groups (FLC/GLC) have been activated; clusters and working 
groups maintain inter -agency coordination mechanisms to ensure the articulation and 
relevance of the response. 
 
Humanitarian financing  
 Initial resource mobilization includes an allocation of US$15 million from the Central 
Emergency Response Fund (CERF) for an immediate multisectoral response, together with 
the activation of the Venezuela Humanitarian Fund (VHF) to channel resources to par tners 
with operational capacity in the affected areas. 
 The United States announced a contribution of US$100 million to the VHF, as well as an 
additional US$50 million for response operations of the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM), the World Food Programme (WFP), World Vision, International Medical Corps, Catholic 
Relief Services and Samaritan’s Purse. Other Member States and donors have expressed 
their intention to support the VHF and expand available funding. 
 OCHA will continue coordinating with donors and partners to ensure rapid, strategic and 
needs-based allocation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Contact information 
For more information, please contact the OCHA Venezuela Office: 
 
Vanessa May – Head of Office a.i. – mayv@un.org  
Alfonso Zabaleta – Humanitarian Affairs Officer – alfonso.zabaleta@un.org  
Jennifer Moreno – Public Information Officer – moreno7@un.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Support the humanitarian response to address the earthquake in Venezuela 
Make your donation safely and quickly now: 
https://crisisrelief.un.org/en/donate-venezuela-crisis