Good morning.
Donald Trump defended himself against criticism from fellow Republicans yesterday as he appeared on the verge of agreeing a deal with Iran to end the war.
As hawks in his party called the proposed agreement a disaster and questioned why the US president had launched the conflict in the first place, Trump claimed on social media that his deal would be “THE EXACT OPPOSITE” of the one agreed by Barack Obama, which Trump pulled out of in 2018.
He added that he was not rushing into a deal, saying “both sides must take their time to get it right … There can be no mistakes!”
Trump has ‘alienated’ voters ahead of midterms, warns ousted Republican Thomas Massie
Thomas Massie speaks with supporters after his concession speech on 19 May in Hebron, Kentucky.
 Photograph: Jon Cherry/Getty Images
Donald Trump’s Republican party is 
on course for a damaging rejection at the ballot box in November
, according to a maverick US congressman ousted by a challenger handpicked by the president.
Thomas Massie, a Republican from Kentucky, became the latest of Trump’s targets to be defeated in the party’s primaries this week. He had repeatedly broken with the president over military action against Iran, government spending and the release of the Jeffrey Epstein files.
As control of US Congress hangs in the balance, Massie warned on Sunday that Trump had “disenfranchised” many of the Americans who had voted for him – and their party – in November 2024.




Why does he think voters are becoming disenfranchised?
 Massie pointed to several significant constituencies – including “Make America healthy again” campaigners, fiscal hawks pushing for sweeping government budget cuts, and voters who don’t want the US engaged in wars – who he claimed had been “alienated” by the administration’s actions. “And so, I’m worried that in November, this is going to cost the party a lot.”


Overheated chemical tank in southern California 
may explode, says EPA chief
A drone view shows water being sprayed during a chemical incident in Garden Grove, California, on 23 May.
 Photograph: David Swanson/Reuters
Government officials in Orange county, California, 
have warned that an overheated chemical tank “will fail”
 and could result in a chemical explosion in the area, the Environmental Protection Agency administrator said yesterday.
“We’re being told that the tank will fail, but there are different scenarios as to what that means,” Lee Zeldin told CNN’s State of the Union. Zeldin, a former Republican congressman with no prior experience in environmental policy, was chosen by Trump as the head of the EPA.
“The most catastrophic scenario” at the aerospace facility in the city of Garden Grove, just five miles from Disneyland, Zeldin said, would be “an explosion that results in other tanks to explode”.
In other news …
Mothers gather outside Paris city hall to protest against child sexual abuse by staff in schools and after-school care centres.
 Photograph: Amaury Cornu/Hans Lucas/AFP/Getty Images




France is facing 
a child abuse scandal
 as 
“monitors
” at dozens of state nursery and primary schools are investigated for violence, sexual assault and rape
. Paris police are looking into more than 100 allegations of mistreatment by school monitors who supervised lunch breaks, nap times and after-school activities.




Politicians must be held accountable if their lies damage democracy, 
according to Andrew Weissmann
, former US federal prosecutor and FBI general counsel who was pursued by Donald Trump.




Sweden’s prime minister has promised to put IVF at the heart of his re-election campaign
 as he tries to win over female voters 
amid the country’s record low
 
birthrate
.


Stat of the day: Films more likely to star an actor called Chris or a talking animal than a woman over 60, study finds
Emma Thompson is among the voices supporting an anti-ageism campaign.
 Photograph: Matt Towers/PA
Box office hit films are 
four times more likely to star a talking animal than a woman over 60
, according to a survey by Age Without Limits. The anti-ageism campaign studied the 100 highest performing films released in the UK in 2023, 2024 and 2025, and found that while five starred an older woman, about 20 featured creatures who chat.
Building power: Eva v Goliath – the 20-year-old climate activist taking on Trump and the fossil fuel industry
Eva Lighthiser.
 Photograph: Will Warasila/The Guardian
Young Americans are suing the president over executive orders they say worsen the climate crisis and violate their constitutional rights. 
One of them is Eva Lighthiser
. She and 22 other plaintiffs accuse the US government of boosting planet-warming fossil fuels through a series of executive orders.
Don’t miss this: 
the Democrats’ 2024 autopsy ‘fails to confront the truth’
‘I don’t endorse what’s in this report,’ Ken Martin conceded as the autopsy went public.
 Photograph: Allison Robbert/AP
The Democratic National Committee’s long-delayed autopsy of the party’s 2024 election defeat has been overshadowed by the chaotic circumstances of its release, including the DNC chair publicly distancing himself from it. The document has two glaring omissions: the decision to let Joe Biden pursue re-election until it was too late, and the political impact of the Gaza genocide, 
writes Norman Solomon
.
… or this: ‘There is profound disappointment in him’ – mood in Russia turns against Putin
‘There is little doubt that Putin is entering the most challenging period of his long rule.’
 Photograph: Alexander Nemenov/EPA
Interviews with several people in the orbit of the Russian leader, as well as sources in the Russian business world and western intelligence officials, paint a picture of 
an isolated leader surrounded by an elite that is becoming rapidly disillusioned
, both with the faltering war in Ukraine and the economic downturn at home. There is little doubt that Putin is entering the most challenging period of his long rule.
Climate check: 
could nature itself hold the solution to the climate crisis
?
Technological interventions face huge financial or practical challenges, but there is another way.
 Illustration: Elia Barbieri/The Guardian
Many people believe the scale of the climate challenge calls for immense technological innovation, geoengineering, or the transformation of our economy. But with these solutions there are often painful trade-offs. There is one set of solutions, however, that present no trade-off at all when they are done right. 
The restoration of natural habitats like forests
.
Last Thing: K-pop androids and automated artists – welcome to South Korea’s strange and ambitious robot theme park
Galaxy Robot Park in South Korea hopes to attract tourists to concerts and fashion shows, but can robots ever replicate K-pop’s connection with fans?
 Photograph: Jeon Heon-Kyun/EPA
Four child-sized humanoid robots take to the stage at an arena in eastern Seoul, and as the opening beats of a song by K-pop star G-Dragon begin, they start to dance, until – mid-performance – one of them seemingly malfunctions and has to be removed from the stage. Welcome to 
the “world’s first robot theme park
”.
Sign up
Sign up for the US morning briefing
First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, 
subscribe now
.
Get in touch
If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email 
newsletters@theguardian.com