Home
                    


 







                        Middle East
                    








Live


Middle East war live: New strikes threaten ceasefires in Iran, Lebanon






Issued on: 
27/05/2026 - 03:48
Modified: 
27/05/2026 - 07:16
 


















A man checks a house that was destroyed in an Israeli airstrike in Burj al-Shemali village near the southern port city of Tyre, Lebanon, May 26, 2026
 
¬© Mohammed Zaatari, AP
 















                                Tehran on Tuesday accused Washington of breaching their ceasefire and warned it was ready to retaliate after overnight US strikes as Israeli bombardment in¬ÝLebanon¬Ýleft dozens dead, threatening an increasingly fragile truce there.¬ÝFollow our liveblog for all the latest developments.            




¬Ý
 








27/05/2026 - 07:16
China allows fresh urea exports amid Iran war-fuelled fertiliser crisis


China has ‚ÅÝissued export ‚Äãquotas for urea fertiliser, sources with ‚Äãdirect knowledge of the matter said, a move that could help ease soaring global ‚Äãprices ‚Äåfor one of the world‚Äôs ‚ÅÝmost widely used crop nutrients after supply disruptions ‚Äålinked to the Iran war.
One of ‚ÅÝthe world's largest fertiliser exporters, China banned exports of many categories in ‚ÄãMarch to protect domestic farmers ‚Äåfrom the surge in prices triggered by the closure of the Strait of Hormuz, ‚Äåthrough which a large share of global fertilisers ‚Äãand their inputs normally flow.






27/05/2026 - 06:50
 Iran war threatens Sudan's already fragile agricultural sector


As the US's conflict with Iran continues to block crucial shipping lanes, Sudanese farmers are warning it is disrupting food production in an already unstable nation. The country is still in the midst of a war between the army and the RSF paramilitary, and fuel and fertilizer price hikes are forcing cutbacks in summer planting. FRANCE 24's Clemence Waller tells us more from the ground.






27/05/2026 - 04:34






27/05/2026 - 04:33






27/05/2026 - 03:50
Israel says it targets new Hamas leader in Gaza as Palestinians report 3 dead


¬ÝIsrael carried out a pair of airstrikes in Gaza City late Tuesday, killing at least three people and injuring 12, hospital officials said. The strike took place on the eve of Eid al-Adha, a major Muslim holiday.
In a joint statement, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his defense minister, Israel Katz, said the strikes had targeted the new leader of Hamas' military wing. They identified him as Mohammed Odeh and called him ‚Äúone of the architects‚Äù of the Oct. 7, 2023, attacks that triggered over two years of war.¬Ý
The strike came less than two weeks after Israel killed the previous head of Hamas' military wing, Izz al-Din al-Haddad.






27/05/2026 - 03:42
Israeli military says projectile from Lebanon falls in open area in Israel, no injuries


The Israeli military ‚ÅÝsaid on Wednesday a ‚Äãprojectile launched ‚Äåfrom¬Ý
Lebanon
¬Ýfell ‚Äåin an ‚Äãopen area in Israel after sirens sounded ‚Äãin ‚Äãseveral northern ‚Äãareas, but no ‚Äãinjuries were reported.






27/05/2026 - 03:42
New strikes threaten ceasefires in Iran, Lebanon


Tehran on Tuesday accused Washington of breaching their ceasefire and warned it was ready to retaliate after overnight US strikes, while Israeli bombardment in¬Ý
Lebanon
¬Ýleft dozens dead, threatening an increasingly fragile truce there.
In south¬Ý
Lebanon
, Israel carried out strikes on Tuesday that Beirut's health ministry said killed 31 people, including at least four children.
Iran
¬Ýhas demanded that any peace accord apply to¬Ý
Lebanon
, where an April 17 truce has failed to stop fighting that began when militant group Hezbollah attacked Israel in early March.¬Ý
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Monday vowed to "crush" Hezbollah, and an Israeli military official told AFP the following day that the country's forces were expanding their ground operations deeper inside¬Ý
Lebanon
.








 
The 
United States
 has violated the ceasefire¬Ýwith strikes in¬Ý
Iran
's southern Hormozgan province, Iran's foreign ministry said in a statement Tuesday.
 
Iran's vice president said that the government has taken the first steps to restore the internet after a near-total blackout since war with the United States and 
Israel
 broke out in late February.¬Ý
 
Israeli ‚Äãmedia reported¬Ýthat the 
military
 had expanded ‚Äãits ‚Äåground ‚ÅÝoperations in southern ‚ÄåLebanon beyond the "Yellow ‚ÅÝLine".
 
Lebanon
's health ministry said¬Ýthe cumulative toll from the Israeli ‚Äãoffensive since March 2 had reached 3,213 dead and 9,737 wounded by May 26.
 
 
Please find all the latest updates from Tuesday, May 26 
here
.
 
(FRANCE 24 with AFP, Reuters and AP)






















2






As it happened





                                    Middle East
                            
















3






As it happened





                                    Middle East
                            
























Keywords for this article