17/06/2026 - 13:28
Russia's Lavrov discusses US-Iran framework agreement with Iran's Araghchi


Russian Foreign ​Minister Sergei Lavrov spoke ​to his Iranian counterpart Abbas Araghchi on Wednesday about ​the ‌US-Iranian ⁠agreement to end the war ‌in the Gulf, and said ⁠Moscow was ready to help, Lavrov's ​ministry said.
US and ‌Iranian officials said on Sunday they had ‌agreed on a framework to ​end their war, halt the US blockade of Iran ​and reopen the Strait ​of Hormuz.
Russia ​is ready to support efforts ​to resolve the crisis "based on its unique experience and expertise", ⁠the foreign ministry said.






17/06/2026 - 13:19
Trump says memorandum of understanding with Iran is not final


US ​President Donald Trump said ​that the memorandum of understanding agreed with Iran was not final, and ​that ‌he could resume ⁠a bombing campaign if he did ‌not like it.
"It's a memorandum of ⁠understanding. And if I don't like it, we'll go ​back to shooting at ‌them, dropping bombs on their head. If I don't like ‌it, if they don't behave, we'll ​go right back to dropping bombs right smack in the middle ​of their head, OK?" ​Trump said at the G7 ​summit in France.
Trump said the Iran ​memorandum of understanding did not include immediate sanctions relief for Iran.






17/06/2026 - 11:26
Opening Hormuz Strait will be 'massive step forward', NATO chief Rutte says


NATO chief Mark Rutte hailed the US-Iran deal to end the Middle East war, saying the planned reopening of the Strait of Hormuz would be a "massive step forward".
"The restoration of free passage through the Strait of Hormuz will be a massive step forward, and I know that many allies, through the initiative led by France and the United Kingdom, are ready to support," Rutte told a press conference in Brussels.






17/06/2026 - 11:15
Details of US-Iran peace deal begin to trickle out


The memorandum of ​understanding agreed upon by Washington and Tehran this week, though yet to be made public, reportedly extends a ceasefire announced in April by another 60 days to allow the warring ‌countries to negotiate a permanent truce.
US President Donald Trump appears to have achieved little of what he said he wanted at the outset of the war. Iran's theocratic government remains in place, its stockpile of highly enriched uranium has not been surrendered, its ballistic missile capabilities have not been destroyed and it has not ended its support for allied militant groups such as Hezbollah in Lebanon.
Trump said the agreement states that Iran will not have a nuclear weapon – a restatement of ‌Iran's official position since the 1970s – and US officials allege that further discussions will lead to the removal or destruction of its enriched uranium stockpile.
After decades of US and international financial sanctions that devastated Iran's economy, a peace deal could deliver economic benefits for the Islamic Republic. The memorandum includes a $300 billion reconstruction fund, paid for by neighbouring Gulf states, if Iran complies with other terms.
In the coming 60 days, negotiators will return to difficult issues such as the future of Iran's nuclear programme. But Iran's support for regional militia groups and its missile arsenal do not appear to be on the agenda, in ⁠what would amount to major US concessions.
A senior US official told Reuters the ⁠US will waive sanctions on Iranian oil under the deal to end the war, raising the prospect of millions of additional barrels of supply.






17/06/2026 - 10:05
IEA sees gradual Hormuz recovery tipping into significant 2027 surplus if US-Iran deal holds


The world ​oil market will recover ​gradually from the closure of the Strait of Hormuz before ​tipping ‌into a ⁠significant surplus in 2027, ‌the International Energy Agency said in 
⁠its monthly oil market report
.
The ​US and Iran ‌reached an agreement to end the three-month-old war, which ‌includes Iran reopening the ​Strait of Hormuz and the US lifting its naval blockade, ​potentially bringing an end ​to the largest ​oil supply disruption in history, shutting in more than 14 million barrels per day of Middle East ⁠oil output, according to the IEA.
"If the deal holds, exports ‌and production from the Gulf should see a gradual recovery – not ​least because Iranian oil exports can fully resume once the US blockade is lifted," the agency, which advises industrialised ​countries, said.






17/06/2026 - 09:45
Israeli air strikes leave parts of Nabatieh in ruins


Weeks of Israeli air strikes have left a trail of destruction across southern Lebanon, with the country's health ministry on Tuesday raising the death toll to 3,826 since the war broke out as rescuers pull more bodies from the rubble.
The UN refugees agency published a minute-long video Wednesday showing buildings reduced to rubble in the city of Nebatieh, which Israel continues to target with air strikes.






17/06/2026 - 08:06
G7 leaders commit to weaning world economy off Strait of Hormuz energy flow


The ​leaders of the G7 countries ​said they will make efforts to diversify energy supply routes and reduce dependence on ⁠the Strait of Hormuz and increase energy ⁠stocks.
The joint statement
 also called for an "immediate robust ceasefire" in Lebanon, the disarming of Iran-allied militant group Hezbollah and the protection of Lebanese territorial integrity through "appropriate international security guarantees".






17/06/2026 - 07:38
Several Israeli strikes hit southern Lebanon, Lebanese state media reports


Israeli forces carried out airstrikes on several areas in southern Lebanon, state media reported, despite a peace deal in the Middle East war that includes Lebanon.
Lebanon's National News Agency said Israeli warplanes launched raids targeting the Nabatieh al-Fawqa area and the eastern outskirts of neighbouring town Kfar Tebnit. 
The Israelis also launched a drone strike on the town of Ansariyeh in the Zahrani area, NNA reported.






17/06/2026 - 04:46
Iranian crude oil tankers exit US blockade zone: tracking site


Iranian oil tankers have exited the zone in the Gulf blockaded by the US Navy, the TankerTrackers website said on Wednesday, calling it the country's "first crude oil exports in two months".
"At least two National Iranian Tanker Company (NITC) VLCC supertankers named DIONA (9569695) and HERO2 (9362073) have exited the US Navy blockade perimeter carrying a combined total of 3.8 million barrels of Iranian crude oil between them," TankerTrackers said in a post on X, citing digital tracking data corroborated by satellite imagery.
The site – which monitors oil shipments and storage – later added that a third NITC tanker had "exited the blockade line with 1 million barrels of Iranian crude oil".






17/06/2026 - 03:16
Trump criticises Israel's tactics in Lebanon, says it is killing civilians


US President Donald Trump on Tuesday issued a rare public rebuke of Israel's military
tactics in Lebanon targeting Hezbollah militants, saying it was unnecessary to bomb entire apartment buildings to hunt militants.
Trump, who in recent days had expressed his ​displeasure over Israeli attacks ‌in Beirut that he said could have endangered his peace deal with Iran, said Israel ⁠has been fighting Hezbollah, the Iran-aligned Lebanese militia, for "too long".
"Too many people have been killed. You don't have to knock down an apartment house every time you're looking for somebody, because ‌there are a lot of people in those apartment houses, and
they're not all Hezbollah," Trump said ⁠at the 
G7
 summit in France.






17/06/2026 - 02:33