23/06/2026 - 12:04
Israel smuggled Starlink systems into Iran, former Israeli PM says


A former Israeli prime minister has acknowledged that Israel had smuggled Starlink internet ​receivers into Iran to help anti-government protesters, though he said Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's government failed to follow through on the plans.
Naftali Bennett, who served as ​prime minister ‌in 2021 to 2022, told an audience at the ⁠JNS International Policy Summit in Jerusalem that he had initiated a "process of acquiring and smuggling into Iran ‌tens of thousands of Starlink receptors that would allow continuity of ⁠the internet and social networks".
Starlink, owned by Elon Musk's SpaceX, provides satellite internet connections. Iran has previously accused Israel and the US of smuggling in the devices to undermine its security. ‌
Starlink is not licensed to operate in Iran but Musk has previously said the service is active there.
Bennett said the devices were intended to enable ‌protesters to coordinate and ultimately topple the Iranian government. .
"Unfortunately, the current incompetent Israeli government stopped doing that," he ​said. "And when the protest happened, that infrastructure was not there."
Netanyahu’s office has not yet commented on Bennett’s allegations.






23/06/2026 - 12:00
Israeli gunfire kills two people in south Lebanon, civil defence says


Israeli ​gunfire killed two people in southern Lebanon on Tuesday, Lebanon's ​Civil Defence and state media said, in the first reported fatalities resulting from Israeli fire in Lebanon in three days.
Israeli soldiers opened fire ⁠at a group of people near a bulldozer clearing a road in the al-Deir neighbourhood of Nabatieh al-Fawqa in ​southern Lebanon, Lebanon's state news agency NNA reported.
The Israeli ‌military said it was checking the report.
A ceasefire between Iran-backed Hezbollah ​and Israeli ‌forces in southern Lebanon has largely held ⁠since Sunday, the longest lull yet in the war that spilled over from the ‌conflict between the US and Iran.






23/06/2026 - 10:46
Pezeshkian heads to Pakistan for first visit since launch of lran war


Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian visits Pakistan for talks Tuesday with officials who have been mediating negotiations between Tehran and Washington.
Pezeshkian's visit, his first to Pakistan since the US and Israel launched the Iran war on February 28, comes as technical teams are working on details of the US-Iran deal.
Pakistan was a key mediator during indirect US-Iran talks ahead of the signing of the 14-point Islamabad Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) last week.
Security was tight in the area of Islamabad where the Iranian president was to meet with President Asif Ali Zardari and Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif. 
Pezeshkian and Sharif are set to hold a joint news conference after their discussions.
A billboard in Islamabad features visiting Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian (center) with Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari and Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif on June 23, 2026. (Photo: Anjum Naveed, AP)






23/06/2026 - 09:57
Iran says no visit scheduled for UN nuclear inspectors


Iran has said there are no visits scheduled for inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to see nuclear sites earlier bombed by the United States.
Foreign Ministry spokesman Esmail Baghaei said there was ​no protocol for such inspections, adding that Iran ​would continue ​its current obligations ​as a member of ​the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and under its safeguards agreement ⁠with the IAEA.
His remarks appear to undercut those made by US Vice President JD Vance, who said negotiations in Switzerland won an agreement for the IAEA to visit the Iranian sites.
The IAEA has been in and out of Iran since Israel’s 12-day war against Iran in 2025, but has not been granted access to the bombed enrichment sites targeted by America in that war.






23/06/2026 - 08:30
Lebanon war damage estimated at $1.3 billion, but who will foot the bill?


Massive destruction in southern Lebanon in the latest Israel-Hezbollah war is estimated at around $1.38 billion, according to a UN agency and a Lebanese research centre.
"In total, 11,095 buildings were completely destroyed, impacting 17,891 housing units, while 2,242 buildings sustained partial damage ... and 9,311 buildings incurred minor damage," the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and Lebanon's government-linked National Council for Scientific Research (CNRS) said.
Reporting from Beirut, FRANCE 24’s Renée Davis notes that while the latest US-Iran deal includes a proposed $300 billion reconstruction fund for Iran, Lebanon’s reconstruction was not mentioned in the 14-point Islamabad memorandum of understanding.






23/06/2026 - 07:24
Iran says technical talks with US end, working groups to be formed


Technical talks between Iran and the US in Switzerland have concluded, with negotiating groups to be set up on nuclear issues and sanctions, according to Iran's state media.
The negotiators "decided that four working groups would be established: Sanctions Termination, Nuclear Affairs, Reconstruction and Economic Development, and Monitoring and Implementation", said IRNA state news agency, quoting Deputy Foreign Minister Kazem Gharibabadi. 






23/06/2026 - 07:21
Rubio faces tough task of selling Iran deal on Gulf visit


US Secretary of State Marco Rubio faces a delicate mission this week ​pitching the US-Iran deal to Gulf Arab leaders who fear excessive concessions will strengthen Tehran and reshape the region's security balance and oil flows.
Rubio visits the United Arab Emirates on Tuesday, before traveling to Kuwait and Bahrain, where he will meet officials from the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), a grouping of monarchies that also includes Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Oman.
At issue are elements of a draft ​agreement that include no limits ‌on Iran’s ballistic missiles, a proposed $300 billion reconstruction fund and provisions that could expand Tehran’s regional influence and control over critical oil shipping lanes.
Some of the Sunni-majority GCC countries are feeling privately disappointed by an interim deal ‌that could open the door to US normalisation with Iran, a predominantly Shiite nation.
Washington’s Gulf allies have paid a high price since the US and Israel launched the Iran war. GCC states, including Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Saudi Arabia and the UAE, all of which host US military assets, suffered attacks from Iran. 






23/06/2026 - 04:43
Asian shares mixed as market rally cools amid Iran uncertainty


Asian shares were mixed in subdued trading early Tuesday, as recent enthusiasm cooled and markets faced uncertainty about efforts to end the war in Iran.
Japan's benchmark Nikkei 225 lost 0.9% in morning trading to 71,681.29.
"We've had eight days of strong markets. The market was up for about 12.5%, and now it has cooled off a little bit," said Neil Newman, managing director and head of strategy at Astris Advisory Japan.
Australia's S&P/ASX 200 was up less than 0.1% in morning trading at 8,822.10. South Korea's Kospi dipped 2.8% to 8,863.52. Hong Kong's Hang Seng slipped 0.4% to 23,678.22, while the Shanghai Composite added 0.2% to 4,170.58.






23/06/2026 - 04:03
Iran says Strait of Hormuz will be administered by Tehran


Iran's chief negotiator Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf said that the Strait of Hormuz will be administered by Tehran, state media reported on Tuesday, following talks pushing to end the US-Israeli war on the Islamic republic.
Iran and the United States agreed on Monday to set up communication lines to keep the vital shipping route open and end fighting in Lebanon, mediators said, after their first round of talks in Switzerland toward ending the conflict that has engulfed the Middle East.
"The Strait of Hormuz will never return to its pre-war conditions and will be administered by the Islamic Republic of Iran, in accordance with international law," Ghalibaf said on his return from the talks, according to IRNA.
In a video posted to Ghalibaf's Telegram account, he said the talks at the luxury Swiss resort of Burgenstock produced "good achievements".
"In my view, this trip had good achievements, especially regarding the discussion of the Strait, the Lebanon discussions, the question of oil waiver, and the matter of releasing the frozen funds," he said.






23/06/2026 - 03:59
 
Welcome to the FRANCE 24 liveblog covering events in the Middle East. Catch up on yesterday's developments 
here
.