Sailors assigned to the Unmanned Surface Vessel Division 32 are at the forefront of the Navy's fleet during exercise Baltic Operation 2026, delivering realistic counter-unmanned surface vessel training against unmanned vessels to 
NATO
 allies.












Established early this year, USVDIV-32 is one of the newest additions to the Navy's unmanned operational units. Tasked with maintaining and implementing unmanned vessels, the division's sailors regularly conduct exercises and training with multiple platforms, with the most common being global autonomous reconnaissance craft, or GARC. 


"GARCs are just one of the several USVs," said Navy Lt. Sarah Weinstein, commanding officer of USVDIV-32. "GARC is just the one that we've had the most experience with, in the last couple of years, but they're all very similar. " 


A defining feature of USVDIV-32 is the implementation of a new rate, robotics warfare specialist. These specialists are trained to operate and maintain vessels such as GARCs. 


Navy Petty Officer 3rd Class Joshua VanDeCreek, robotics warfare specialist, expressed excitement about being on the front lines of a new technology that he believes will keep more people safe by sending USVs as opposed to personnel, calling it "a great step in the future."


"I'm proud to be a part of a new unit in the Navy, one that I think is going to be very important," VanDeCreek said.












Navy Chief Petty Officer Christian Butler said the robotics warfare rate will remain vital in the Navy's future. 


"I think most commands, if not all commands, are going to have some component of [robotics warfare specialists], Butler said. "Just because there's no going away from unmanned systems at this point, they're only going to grow in scale, and you're going to need [robotics warfare specialists] to carry that weight." 


During the exercise, USVDIV-32 played a crucial role by deploying GARCs as an opposing force to allied forces. This simultaneously gave allied ships a chance to test their abilities in defending against USVs and provided valuable experience for USDIV-32, allowing them to see their GARCs in action.


"The first difficult part is spotting the USV," Weinstein said. "What does it look like? What are the telltale signs that it might be a USV? How to tell if it's coming inbound and its different behaviors that it's able to display as it gets closer to the ship." 


As the Navy moves toward a hybrid fleet, USVDIV-32 is playing the key role in being among the first to implement this technology. The division's work during BALTOPS 2026 has been invaluable not only to the allied forces but also to the USVDIV-32.












The sailors of USVDIV-32, with the emerging robotics specialist rate, are carving the path for the Navy's future. 


This is only the beginning of this technology, with no end in sight for its importance and potential.   


"I think the technology and the autonomy will continue to grow to give them more options to make USVs more lethal or more effective at executing the mission that they've been tasked with," Weinstein said.