Welcome back to World Brief, where we’re looking at another 
Middle East
 threat to global energy markets, the 
United Kingdom
’s new prime minister, and rising political unrest in 
Ukraine
.








First, Hormuz. Now, Red Sea.


Houthi rebels in Yemen declared a 
naval blockade
 of Saudi Arabia on Monday, opening another potential pressure point for global energy markets that are already suffering from Iran’s effective closure of the Strait of Hormuz. Riyadh has yet to formally respond.


Last week, the Tehran-backed proxy group accused Saudi Arabia of 
bombing
 Yemen’s Sanaa International Airport to stop an Iranian plane from landing. The aircraft was reportedly carrying members of Houthi leadership who had attended the funeral of former Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. Although the plane was able to successfully land at another Yemeni airport, the Houthis quickly retaliated with 
missile and drone strikes
 on Saudi Arabia’s Abha International Airport. And on Monday, the group expanded its retribution by vowing to block Saudi shipping between the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden.


Since the Iran war effectively stalled all traffic through the Strait of Hormuz, Riyadh has relied on a pipeline to the Red Sea to export millions of barrels of oil. At the same time, Tehran has pressed the Houthis to close the Red Sea’s 
Bab el-Mandeb Strait
 if the United States continued targeting Iranian power infrastructure; U.S. forces carried out their ninth consecutive day of strikes against Iran on Monday.


Should the Houthi blockade prove to be effective, and if Tehran orders the rebel group to close off Bab el-Mandeb, then global oil supplies could be further reduced, as most Saudi crude exports would be unable to leave the region. Experts warn that this could have drastic consequences for energy markets.


Efforts to reopen the Strait of Hormuz and restore disrupted supply chains have proved to be futile thus far. On Monday, Iranian Interior Minister Eskandar Momeni 
arrived
 in Islamabad for a two-day trip focused on renewing negotiations with the United States, during which Momeni is expected to meet with Pakistani Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif. And on Tuesday, foreign ministers in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations are 
expected to push
 for a full reopening of the critical thoroughfare.


Yet the United States appears unwilling to engage in diplomacy for now. “Their behavior has to change in order for ours to change,” U.S. Secretary of State 
Marco Rubio
 told reporters on Sunday, referring to Iranian leadership.


That day, U.S. Central Command 
confirmed
 that U.S. strikes had hit “Iranian military command centers, air defense and coastal surveillance sites, maritime capabilities, missile and drone launch sites, and communications networks.” Meanwhile, Iranian state media 
accused
 Washington of killing at least one person near the northwestern city of Tabriz, which is believed to have underground missile bases run by Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.


Although the U.S. military said that the operation was intended to further degrade Tehran’s ability to attack commercial shipping, U.S. President Donald Trump 
stressed
 that the Sunday attacks were carried out “in honor of” the recent deaths of several U.S. service members. That includes at least two soldiers who were 
killed
 in Jordan on Friday during an Iranian missile and drone attack and another service member who was killed in Iraq on Saturday during the “controlled detonation” of a downed Iranian drone.


Iran responded to the United States’ recent slew of strikes with more attacks on Bahrain and Kuwait on Monday.




Today’s Most Read




The World This Week


Tuesday, July 21:
 The Association of Southeast Asian Nations begins a three-day foreign ministers’ meeting in the Philippines.


Trump hosts Lebanese President Joseph Aoun.


Wednesday, July 22:
 European Union ambassadors discuss another sanctions package on Russia.


Former Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro is expected to be charged in a New York City court.


New 25 percent U.S. tariffs on Brazilian goods take effect.


Thursday, July 23:
 The Shanghai Cooperation Organisation begins a two-day foreign ministers’ meeting in Kyrgyzstan.


Solomon Islands Prime Minister Matthew Wale begins a three-day trip to Japan.


Friday, July 24:
 The Assembly of States Parties holds a special session to discuss removing Karim Khan, the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.


The United Nations Security Council begins its selection process to choose a new secretary-general.


Monday, July 27:
 The Pakistani-controlled Azad Jammu and Kashmir holds legislative elections.




What We’re Following


‘Circuit breaker.’ 
Andy Burnham 
became
 the United Kingdom’s seventh prime minister since 2016 on Monday, beginning what the ruling Labour Party hopes will be a more successful tenure at Downing Street than predecessor Keir Starmer’s attempt. “We will make this moment a circuit breaker for Britain, bringing forward a new political model and a new economic model,” Burnham said in his first speech as premier.


Speaking without notes, Burnham outlined a 
domestic-focused agenda
, vowing to raise living standards, build more public housing, increase defense spending, and revive a country that is “fed up” with its constantly changing leadership. Although his speech did not include many policy specifics, Burnham promised to unveil a more detailed strategy in the coming days.


This first week will be critical to 
Burnham’s success
, as he must now form a 
cabinet
. On Monday, he began that task, reappointing Shabana Mahmood as interior minister, tapping John Healey to be finance minister, and naming Ed Miliband as foreign minister.


The Fedorov debacle. 
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky 
held
 “key talks” on Monday in an effort to quell a burgeoning political crisis that erupted last week over his dismissal of Defense Minister Mykhailo Fedorov. Although Zelensky reportedly offered to 
bring back
 the popular 35-year-old cabinet official with an expanded mandate, Fedorov rejected the peace offering, sparking even greater unrest.


In just six months in the role, Fedorov had gained immense 
public support
 for spearheading Kyiv’s technology drive, including its drone development program. However, that wasn’t enough to stop Zelensky from replacing Fedorov on Thursday, citing the latter’s 
growing rift
 with Gen. Oleksandr Syrskyi, the commander of the Ukrainian Armed Forces.


As thousands of protesters 
continue to condemn
 Zelensky’s cabinet reshuffle, the Ukrainian president appears to be hoping that military victories can earn him back some public approval. Overnight on Monday, Kyiv launched more than 400 drones toward Moscow, hitting logistics facilities and an oil depot. But Andrei Vorobyov, the governor of the Moscow region, accused Ukraine of damaging residential buildings and civilian infrastructure.


India’s Cockroach movement. 
Tens of thousands of demonstrators with India’s youth-led Cockroach movement 
descended
 on New Delhi on Monday to demand the resignation of Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan. According to Indian police, protesters tried to breach security barricades to gain access to Parliament, 
prompting
 authorities to fire tear gas and use batons. However, Cockroach Janta Party spokesperson Saurav Das accused the police of “brutally cracking down” on “peaceful protesters” in 
Jantar Mantar
, a designated site for demonstrations.


The initially satirical Cockroach Janta Party emerged in May after Supreme Court Chief Justice Surya Kant compared unemployed young people to “cockroaches.” In the following months, the movement has grown in popularity, especially after leaked 
test questions
 forced millions of medical school, university, and job applicants to retake some of the world’s toughest entrance exams. This unrest escalated over the weekend following the 
forced removal
 and hospitalization of activist Sonam Wangchuk, who had been on hunger strike for more than 20 days.


Now, the movement is 
calling for reforms
 to the examination system, compensation for the families of students who 
died by suicide
 following the leaks, and new policies to address unemployment and high costs of living. New Delhi has previously taken a hard stance against the Cockroach Janta Party, but escalating public outcry forced Health Minister J.P. Nadda to hold talks with the group’s leadership for the first time on Monday.




Odds and Ends


After 39 days, 48 teams, and 104 matches, the 2026 FIFA World Cup men’s tournament ended on Sunday with Spain 
defeating
 Argentina to win this year’s trophy. It was a close game, with both teams entering overtime scoreless. But a beautiful goal by substitute Ferran Torres gave Spain the leverage that it needed to clinch its second men’s World Cup victory in history. Special shoutouts must also go to team captain Rodrigo Cascante (known as Rodri) for winning the Golden Ball as best player in the tournament and goalie Unai Simón for winning the Golden Glove as best keeper at this year’s World Cup.