20/07/2026 - 10:41
Iran calls on global watchdog to condemn US strikes on under-construction nuclear site


Iran urged the United Nations nuclear watchdog to condemn US strikes that it said targeted the Darkhovin nuclear power plant under construction in the country's southwest.
"Iran ... expects the IAEA (International Atomic Energy Agency) Board of Governors and the Director General of the IAEA, who from time to time makes political statements regarding the Iranian nuclear issue, to clearly state their position on this matter in condemning the US crime," Iranian foreign ministry spokesman Esmaeil Baghaei said at a press conference in Tehran.






20/07/2026 - 10:06
Iran says diplomatic exchanges with US ongoing through mediators


Iran said on Monday that diplomatic exchanges with the United States via mediators were ongoing despite US military strikes on the country.
"We have been informed by mediators, we have received messages -- without going into details -- but the main point is that the diplomatic apparatus has been active in recent days and ideas have been conveyed to us by certain mediators," said Iranian foreign ministry spokesman Esmaeil Baghaei at a press conference in Tehran attended by AFP.






20/07/2026 - 09:45
Crew abandons vessel on fire attacked in Hormuz, UK maritime agency says


Sailors safely abandoned a vessel set alight after it was attacked in the Strait of Hormuz, the UK Maritime Trade Operations agency said.
"The vessel was struck by an unknown projectile. The crew safely abandoned the vessel and have been recovered by a tug boat. The fire has not been extinguished and the vessel is currently adrift. There is no reported environmental impact," UKMTO said in a an update to their earlier statement.
Earlier, the agency had reported the ship was "on fire" eight nautical miles northwest of Kumzar, Oman.
Iran's Revolutionary Guards said that two oil tankers trying to transit the Strait of Hormuz "exploded and were brought to a halt".






20/07/2026 - 08:41
US strikes hit Bushehr, an Iranian city home to a civilian nuclear plant, state media reports


US strikes hit several locations in Iran's southern port city of Bushehr, home to the country's only civilian nuclear plant, state media reported.
"A few minutes ago, several locations in Bushehr city were hit by American enemy's projectiles," said Bushehr governor Mohammad Mozaffari, as quoted by official state news agency IRNA.






20/07/2026 - 08:04
One person killed in US strikes on northwest Iran, state media says


US strikes overnight in northwestern Iran killed at least one person and wounded several more, state media reported.
"One person was martyred and several others were injured in a terrorist and aggressive American attack on an area southwest of Tabriz on Monday morning," said Majid Farshi, head of crisis management of East Azerbaijan province, quoted by state news agency IRNA.






20/07/2026 - 07:50
Explosions heard in Bahrain's Manama after air raid sirens sound


Explosions were heard in the Bahraini capital Manama on Monday morning after air raid sirens were triggered, AFP journalists reported.
"The siren has been sounded, citizens and residents are urged to remain calm and head to the nearest safe place," the Gulf state's interior ministry wrote on X.






20/07/2026 - 07:38
Sirens sound again in Bahrain, interior ministry says








20/07/2026 - 06:43
Kuwait says its air defences are working to intercept incoming Iranian fire


Kuwaiti air defences were "engaging hostile drone attacks" from Iran, the Gulf state's military.
"The General Staff of the Army notes that any explosions heard are a result of air defense systems intercepting the hostile attacks," the Kuwait Army said in a post on its official X account. Iran's Revolutionary Guards said earlier Monday they had hit US military targets in Kuwait.






20/07/2026 - 06:42
Iran Guards say hit US military targets in Kuwait


Iran's Revolutionary Guards said they hit US military targets in Kuwait, including an early-warning radar system that was "completely destroyed", in a statement reported by state news agency IRNA.
Iranian forces "completely destroyed a US early-warning radar system in a drone strike", the Guards alleged.
"In a separate attack, they struck an equipment and aircraft parts warehouse and an MQ-9 drone hangar at Ali Al Salem Air Base, setting several drones on fire."






20/07/2026 - 04:11
US Central Command says it successfully completed the ninth consecutive evening of strikes against Iran, July 19, at 10 pm ET.


The US military said Monday it ended its latest round of airstrikes targeting Iran.
The US military’s Central Command said it targeted “Iranian military command centers, air defense and coastal surveillance sites, maritime capabilities, missile and drone launch sites and communications networks.”
There was no immediate word from Iran on any casualties or damage from the attacks. Iranian state media reported explosions being heard in southern and northwestern Iran.






20/07/2026 - 04:01
Rubio says Iran using Hormuz as leverage, calls on other countries to 'step up'


US Secretary of State Marco Rubio said late Sunday that Iran is using the Strait of Hormuz as leverage in the ongoing Middle East conflict, adding that other countries needed to step up pressure to protect global shipping.
"It's clear that Iran, at least some people in Iran, want to control the straits and hold that as leverage against the world," Rubio told reporters ahead of traveling to the Philippines for a meeting of foreign ministers with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
"The United States will do and continue to do what it needs to, to protect global shipping, but other countries need to begin to step up and provide, whether it's hardware or finances, to help carry that burden," he continued.






20/07/2026 - 04:01
Iran Guards say targeted US planes at Jordan's Aqaba airport


Iran's Revolutionary Guards said Monday that they had targeted US military aircraft stationed at Aqaba Airport in Jordan and caused "severe damage" to some of them, state media reported.
American heavy transport aircraft and command and control aircraft "were targeted with ballistic missiles, causing severe damage to a number of them", the Guards said in a statement carried by Iran's state broadcaster.






20/07/2026 - 03:37
Iran's Guards say two oil tankers 'exploded' in southern Strait of Hormuz


The ⁠Islamic Revolutionary ​Guard Corps said on Monday ​that two oil tankers had exploded and been immobilised after attempting to ​transit ‌what it ⁠described as an unsafe southern route through ‌the Strait of Hormuz, alleging they ⁠had been encouraged by the US military to ​use the
passage.
The Guards said the waterway would remain unsafe as long ​as what it called US "aggression" ​in the region ​continued, warning that "this passage will not be safe ​for the transit of petrochemical products, nor even a single drop of oil and ⁠gas."
They told the U.S. military to ⁠prepare ​for a "punitive operation."






20/07/2026 - 03:29
Iran's Revolutionary Guards say Strait of Hormuz will not be safe for petrochemical products or "single drop of oil and gas" transit as long as US actions in region continue.






20/07/2026 - 03:05
Brent crude climbs above $90 a barrel, highest level since June






20/07/2026 - 02:28
Trump says US hitting Iran 'very hard' to honor Americans killed


US President Donald Trump said Sunday the latest military strikes on Iran were being carried out in honor of US service members killed in recent days.
"We hit them very hard again tonight, and we did that in honor of the, probably three, it's probably three great patriots," Trump told reporters as he returned to Washington following the World Cup final.
Trump said "we feel very badly," when asked about the military fatalities, adding that those who died were fighting so that "Iran cannot have a nuclear weapon."






20/07/2026 - 02:05
US embassy in Bahrain says Iran may seek to target sites in central Manama


The ⁠US ​embassy ​in Manama said ​on Monday ‌it ⁠had ‌information suggesting ⁠Iran may ​seek to ‌target unspecified locations ‌in ​central Manama and urged ​Americans ​in Bahrain ​to remain ​vigilant.






20/07/2026 - 02:03
British military says a ship is ablaze in the Strait of Hormuz near the coast of Oman


 A ship caught fire early Monday in the Strait of Hormuz near the coastline of Oman, the British military said.
The British military’s United Kingdom Maritime Trade Operations center issued a warning about the fire, saying it was unclear what sparked the blaze.
The US military has been encouraging ships to use a route near Oman to transit the Strait of Hormuz. Iran has responded with attacks targeting those vessels, insisting it must have control over the crucial waterway through which a fifth of all oil and natural gas traded once passed in peacetime.






20/07/2026 - 01:26
Kuwait army says intercepting Iranian drone attacks


Kuwaiti air defences were "engaging hostile drone attacks following Iranian aggression", the army said early on Monday.
"The General Staff of the Army notes that any explosions heard are a result of air defense systems intercepting the hostile attacks," the Kuwait Army said in a post on its official X account.






20/07/2026 - 01:19
US military says beginning ninth night of strikes on Iran