Alliance with One Nation ‘not our plan’, Angus Taylor says
The opposition leader, 
Angus Taylor
,
 
said the Coalition doesn’t believe 
Pauline Hanson
’s One Nation can be the party of government, describing it as a “one-person show”.
Taylor spoke to ABC News Breakfast, saying the opposition was focused on getting rid of the Labor government, but wasn’t interested in “some kind of coalition or alliance” with 
One Nation
. He said:


double quotation mark
We are working to get rid of the Labor government, that’s our focus. Our focus isn’t on some kind of coalition or alliance. Our focus is on getting rid of a rotten Labor government. I want us to be in government in our own right.


That is not our plan. Our plan is to get rid of the government.


Liberal leader Angus Taylor.
 Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP
Share
Updated at 
18.17 EDT
Key events
Wong says world really wants ceasefire to hold
Wong said she believes the ceasefire deal in the Middle East is “certainly fraying around the edges” amid strikes between the US and Iran.
The foreign affairs minister said:


double quotation mark
The world really is looking to this ceasefire to hold, to firm up. The world wants to see an end to this conflict, not just for the peoples of the region but because of the effect on the global economy, on energy marketers, and on the hip pocket of so many people around the world, including Australians.


Wong went on to say the government had done a lot of work to ensure the fuel supply remains stable, as well as stocks of fertiliser:


double quotation mark
We worked hard with the countries of the region to diversify supply and to assure supply, and the government will keep doing that.


Penny Wong.
 Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP
Share
Updated at 
17.52 EDT
Wong says 
Telstra
 let Australians down
The foreign affairs minister, 
Penny Wong
, said Telstra had “let the Australian community down” after its outages this week, including trouble with the triple-zero network.
Wong spoke to ABC News Breakfast, maintaining a full investigation would be completed by the media and communications authority.
She said:


double quotation mark
I think I speak for everyone: you know, we do expect, particularly our triple-zero network, to remain functional.


The fact that there were outages on that network is of deep concern to the community, as well as to the government, and Telstra should be accountable for that.


A Telstra store in Sydney on Wednesday.
 Photograph: George Chan/AAP
Share
Updated at 
17.47 EDT
Victorian premier demands Telstra reimburse rail passengers affected by outage
The Victorian government has announced it will reimburse passengers who incurred additional costs during disruptions to the state’s regional rail services caused by the Telstra outage.

 In a statement last night, the premier, 
Jacinta Allan
, said the government would pay back affected passengers and expected “Telstra to match it, dollar for dollar”.

 The state government has also committed to funding two days of free travel on V/Line.

 Allan said it was “completely unacceptable that so many Victorians were stuck without an essential service for so long”.

 “Telstra should compensate Victorians and help make sure it never happens again … Australians have endured too many major outages – and it’s always country people who bear the brunt,” she said.

 Trains across the state are now returning to service and triple zero is continuing to conduct welfare checks.
Disrupted V-Line services at Southern Cross station in Melbourne on Wednesday.
 Photograph: Jay Kogler/AAP
Share
Updated at 
17.26 EDT
Good morning, and happy Friday –
 Nick Visser
 here to take over and round out the week. Let’s get to it.
Hanson says Taylor should go ‘after the real enemy, Labor’
Overnight, Pauline Hanson also posted in 
Angus Taylor
’s direction, suggesting to the Liberal leader that 
his attack on her yesterday
 was a mistake and that he should be going after “the real enemy, Labor”.
She said:


double quotation mark
Angus Taylor has today come out attacking One Nation instead of going after the real enemy, Labor.


Angus has played right into the hands of Anthony Albanese. While the Liberal leader is telling voters how bad One Nation is, he’s quietly adopting One Nation policies.


Stop running scared and desperate, Angus. My priority remains focused on getting this country back on track.


Qantas tops airline punctuality table
Qantas is the world’s most punctual major airline, according to the latest data.
Each month OAG compiles global on-time performance for airlines, based on actual gate arrival times. Flights that arrive within 15 minutes of the schedule are considered on-time.
By this measure, Qantas 
topped the league table
 of “major” airlines in June, with 87.16% of flights arriving on time, just ahead of South America’s Avianca.
Among “large” airlines, Saudi Arabian Airlines topped the table at 92.41%, with Virgin Australia at number 18 on 80.12%.
Qantas has been crowned the mot punctual major airline. 
 Photograph: David Gray/AFP/Getty Images
Pauline Hanson defends UK ‘fact-finding’ trip
Pauline Hanson
 has 
posted an update
 on social media about what she calls a “fact-finding” mission to the UK to find out what has gone “so wrong” with the country.
She sat down for an interview for the podcast of far-right British activist 
Tommy Robinson
, whom she called a “brave man … who has always had the best interest of his nation at heart”.
After a long list of what she claims is wrong with the UK, including “cities where most women wear burkas”, Hanson says:


double quotation mark
No thanks. That’s not what I want for Australia. Each day I’ll bring you a sneak peak of my visit before putting out a long format video once I’m home.


Senator and leader of the One Nation, Pauline Hanson.
 Photograph: David Gray/AFP/Getty Images
Robinson posted on his YouTube channel a clip from a car showing him and Hanson “about to take a walk through my town” of Luton, adding “let’s see what happens”.
Hanson also met 
Rupert Lowe
, the leader of the far-right Restore Britain party, who split from 
Nigel Farage
’s Reform UK. Lowe tweeted “
we certainly share many of the same objectives
”.
Share
Updated at 
17.15 EDT
Good morning and welcome to our live news blog. I’m 
Martin Farrer
 with the top overnight stories and then it’ll be 
Nick Visser
 with the main action.
Pauline Hanson
 has posted an update on social media about what she calls a “fact-finding” mission to the UK to find out what has gone “so wrong” with the country, and defending her meeting with far-right activist 
Tommy Robinson
. More coming up.
The Victorian government has announced it will reimburse passengers who incurred additional costs during disruptions to the state’s regional rail services caused by the Telstra outage.
And new data finds 
Qantas
 is the world’s most punctual major airline.