July 2026
How to safeguard 
human security 
amid changing 
NATO priorities
Colophon
© PAX, July 2026
Author:  Karolina MacLachlan  
  (independent consultant)
Editor:  Erin Bijl 
Design:  Een Ander Bureau
Cover photo:   German fighter jets during a training 
exercise focused on securing   
NATO’s airspace. ©NATO/Flickr, 2023
Disclaimer
This report has been prepared by an independent 
consultant. The views expressed in this paper may 
therefore not necessarily reflect those of PAX. Similarly, 
any public messaging that PAX undertakes on the basis 
of the report’s findings does not necessarily reflect the 
views of the independent consultant.
Acknowledgements
The author wishes to thank NATO and national 
personnel who took the time to share their insights and 
experience regarding the Alliance’s approach to human 
security. Without their openness and generosity, this 
paper would not be possible.
PAX and the Protection of Civilians program
PAX works to build just and peaceful societies across 
the globe. PAX brings together people who have 
the courage to stand for peace. The PAX Protection 
of Civilians (PoC) program seeks to increase the 
effectiveness of PoC interventions by enabling civilians 
to hold local, national and international security actors 
to account, and by enabling and motivating security 
actors to design and implement protection strategies 
that are civilian-centered.
PoC@paxforpeace.nl
www.protectionofcivilians.org
www.paxforpeace.nl
Donor support
This report was made possible with financial support 
from the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Department 
for Stabilisation and Humanitarian Aid (DSH).
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
Contents
List of acronyms 4
1. Introduction: the problem of NATO and its human security approach 5
2. Methodology and approach 7
3. Human security and NATO: from commitment to decline? 9
4. Human security: why invest in it now? 15
5. Conclusion: the way forward for human security within NATO 19
3
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
List of acronyms
ARRC Allied Rapid Reaction Corps
CAAC Children and Armed Conflict
CHM Civilian harm mitigation
CIMIC Civil-military cooperation
CPP Cultural Property Protection
CRSV Conflict-Related Sexual Violence
C-SASE Contributing to a Safe and Secure Environment
CTHB Combatting Trafficking in Human Beings
FABN Facilitating Access to Basic Needs
FINCENT Finnish Defence Forces International Centre 
HQ Headquarters
IO International organisation 
ISAF International Security Assistance Force
MH Mitigating Harm
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 
NGO Non-governmental organisation 
NMI NATO Mission Iraq
NRDC NATO Rapid Deployable Corps
PoC Protection of Civilians
UHE Understanding the Human Environment
UK United Kingdom
UN United Nations
US United States
WPS Women, Peace and Security
4
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
1. Introduction: 
the problem of 
NATO and its 
human security 
approach
In the 2022 Strategic Concept, the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 
(NATO) committed to mainstreaming 
human security – an approach that 
widens the traditional focus of 
‘security’ from states to individuals 
and adopts a population-centric 
approach to conflicts – across its 
core tasks, from collective defence to 
crisis management to partnerships. 
Four years later, however, human 
security appears to be in decline 
within the Alliance, hampered by low 
visibility, limited resources, and a 
lack of concrete, practical guidance 
for militaries. This threatens the 
progress made in understanding and 
mitigating civilian harm in conflict just 
as NATO is preparing for a collective 
defence scenario that would put 
its own populations, governments 
and territories at a major risk of 
harm. The retrenchment is also 
affecting partnerships, including 
the NATO Mission Iraq (NMI), which 
had supported work leading to 
the adoption of Iraq’s National 
Protection of Civilians (PoC) Policy.
The current international landscape – from the United 
States (US) dismantling the Women, Peace and 
Security (WPS) agenda and civilian harm mitigation 
(CHM) approaches to NATO’s focus on collective 
defence and national resilience – is a significant 
contributor to the decline of human security, but it 
is not the whole story. This briefing suggests that a 
lack of specific military guidance, inadequate levels of 
expertise, a lack of understanding from commanders, 
and changes in personnel tasks have all had a negative 
influence on NATO’s ability to translate the political 
commitment to human security into actions that would 
carry practical benefits for civilian populations. 
Despite its weaknesses, however, allowing human 
security to fall by the wayside would be detrimental 
5
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
to military preparedness, including for Article V 
missions.1 Experience from the post-9/11 wars and 
from Ukraine’s self-defence shows the importance 
of the civil environment, as civilians are deliberately 
targeted and as their support becomes decisive 
for the success of military operations. Its relevance 
is also visible in continuing efforts to integrate 
human security with NATO’s current priorities 
at tactical and operational levels, as well as in 
new initiatives in professional military education. 
Adapting human security for collective defence 
would enable NATO to gain a fuller picture of the 
operational environment, understand some of the 
dilemmas facing civilians in that context, address 
gaps in civilian harm mitigation and response, 
nurture  long-term balance between civilian and 
military needs, and maintain operational legitimacy 
and effectiveness. It would also make it easier to 
continue human security work in partnerships and 
crisis management missions as and when possible, 
and to preserve the expertise that many partners 
would benefit from.
1  Article V refers to NATO’s collective defence principle, which states that an attack against one member state is considered an attack on 
all of NATO.
6
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
2. Methodology 
and approach
PAX has a long tradition of working 
on CHM and human security, and 
has engaged extensively with NATO 
entities (including the NATO Mission 
Iraq) and Alliance members. Given 
the apparent decline of human 
security, PAX tasked a consultant 
with human security expertise 
and a deep knowledge of NATO to 
conduct a short research project 
assessing the current position and 
trajectory of the human security 
approach within the Alliance. 
The research, conducted between March and May 
2026, combined a literature review, attendance at 
key NATO events, and interviews or background 
conversations (online and in person) with 17 key 
stakeholders. Among the 17 interviewees, three are 
serving military officers and 14 are civilians, including 
seven with a background in the armed forces. Five 
interviewees work for the NATO Headquarters (HQ) 
and the Command Structure; five are part of the NATO 
Force Structure, i.e., multinational military headquarters 
available for Alliance operations; five are linked to 
national structures that work with NATO daily; one 
works with partnerships; and two are consultants for 
NATO exercises. All have worked extensively across the 
Alliance and have had regular, long-term engagement 
with issues related to human security. To preserve 
confidentiality, all interviews were fully anonymized and 
are referred to only by number. Where useful to confirm 
or contextualise interview findings, the consultant 
utilised previous NATO-related experience. 
Given the short span of the research project, PAX 
decided to prioritise the analysis of NATO entities. 
This is not because implementation of human security 
at the national level is not important; to the contrary, it 
is likely to be decisive in whether and how the concept 
is adopted across the Alliance. NATO institutions, 
however, are key for standardising approaches among 
Allies, showcasing practical implementation measures, 
and providing the impetus for change through doctrinal 
adaptations, exercises, and planning. Including the 
7
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
NATO Force Structure – the multinational military 
headquarters provided by nations for use in NATO’s 
missions – in the research also provides insight into the 
positioning among nations that lead and staff those 
HQs. Where possible and where interviewees had the 
expertise, PAX did ask questions about human security 
and specific Allies, and those insights were included 
in the analysis. 
This paper first offers an analysis of what has impacted 
with human security at NATO, from the changing 
international situation to Allied policies, uneven 
implementation, and conceptual weaknesses. This is 
key to understanding how the concept is perceived 
and why it did not fulfil all the expectations attached 
to it. It then flags ongoing human security work that 
provides the basis for further adaptation, and suggests 
some areas where incorporation of human security 
– and in particular protection of civilians – would enable 
NATO to better address the challenges it is facing. 2  
2  Since PAX specialises in PoC, this is the area this paper focuses on in the first place. This should not, however, be taken to mean that 
other areas of human security are not important.
8
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
3. Human security 
and NATO:  
from commitment 
to decline?
The concept of human security – a 
universal, rights-based approach 
built on commitments to political 
and social rights and the right to 
freedom from wants and needs – was 
first adopted in the United Nations’ 
(UN) development community. 
Unlike the traditional understanding 
of security as integrity of national 
territory and a lack of military 
threats, human security shifted the 
focus of ‘security’ to emergencies 
affecting individuals, making the 
needs of individuals and of civilian 
populations its primary focus.3
3  United Nations Development Programme, ‘ Human Development Report 1994 ,’ New York: Oxford University Press 1994, pp. 13-46; 
Alexander Gilder, ‘The Usefulness of the Human Security Concept for NATO Collective Defence,’ forthcoming publication, 2026, pp. 4-6.
4  ‘Human Security: Approach and Guiding Principles ,’ NATO, 20 October 2022; ‘NATO Policy for the Protection of Civilians ,‘ 9 July 2016; 
NATO Policy on Preventing and Responding to Conflict-Related Sexual Violence ,’ 31 May 2021; ‘NATO Policy on Combatting Trafficking in 
Human Beings ,’ 12 July 2023; ‘NATO Policy on Children and Armed Conflict,’ 12 July 2023.
Through its post-Cold War and post-9/11 operations, 
NATO came to recognise that population attitudes and 
priorities, rather than exclusively government relations, 
had an impact on the legitimacy and effectiveness 
of international forces. Expecting the human security 
approach to provide a ‘heightened understanding’ of 
conflict and of civilian populations, the 2022 NATO 
Strategic Concept committed the Alliance to integrating 
human security – alongside the WPS Agenda – in 
NATO’s core tasks, which include defence and 
deterrence, cooperative security (i.e., partnerships), 
and crisis prevention and response. At the same 
time as it appeared to privilege human security as 
a lens to view the civil environment, however, NATO 
narrowed the concept to five policy areas that it had 
already tackled and where, it argued, it could be the 
most effective: Protection of Civilians (PoC), Children 
and Armed Conflict (CAAC), Conflict-Related Sexual 
Violence (CRSV), Combatting Trafficking in Human 
Beings (CTHB), and Cultural Property Protection (CPP). 4     
9
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
Human security at NATO: what’s in a name?
Human security at NATO is defined as “the risks and threats to civilian populations which may arise 
in all that the Alliance does,” and described as “people-centred, gender-responsive, prevention- 
and protection-oriented.” The goal of incorporating a human security approach is to mitigate the 
risks to civilians and the objects they depend on during conflicts and crises. 5 At the political level 
of the Alliance, human security is effectively an umbrella over five policy areas known as the 
cross-cutting topics (to account for their applicability to all of NATO’s missions):
• Protection of Civilians (PoC). Formalised in a policy adopted in 2016, PoC grew out of NATO’s 
recognition of the impact of civilian casualties in Afghanistan on the effectiveness and legitimacy 
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) mission. In subsequent military guidance, 
PoC was operationalized through a four-part framework: understanding the human environment 
through continuous assessment that is population-centric rather than enemy-centric (UHE); 
mitigating harm to civilians that comes from the force’s own actions as well as from the 
adversary’s conduct (MH, NATO’s primary responsibility); facilitating access to basic needs, for 
example by enabling the work of humanitarian organisations (FABN); and contributing to a safe 
and secure environment by providing the security for civilian institutions (C-SASE). 6
• Conflict-related sexual violence (CRSV). Covering grave, conflict-linked sexual violence, the 
CRSV policy (2021) mandates that NATO assesses the risk of CRSV when deploying, liaises with 
organisations preventing and responding to it, adopts a ‘do no harm’ manner of interacting with 
survivors, and – while not being the main respondent – is prepared to assist survivors in extremis 
and in the absence of other respondents.
• Children and Armed Conflict (CAAC). The 2023 CAAC policy mandates that NATO staff are 
equipped to recognise, report and tackle the UN-defined six grave violations against children in 
conflict, from killing and maiming through sexual abuse and recruitment of children into armed 
groups. They are also mandated to adapt CHM practices to account for specific harm to children.
• Combatting Trafficking in Human Beings (CTHB). Adopted in 2023, the CTHB policy mandates 
NATO to avoid any actions that could increase the demand for trafficking (especially in 
procurement and supply chain management), develop the ability to provide immediate response 
to victims, and liaise with host nations and international institutions to tackle trafficking.
• Cultural Property Protection (CPP). NATO’s commitment to CPP stems from its legal obligations 
enshrined in the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of 
Armed Conflict (1954). While there is no CPP policy, NATO’s strategic military guidance steers 
the Alliance to consider CPP in line with the 2016 PoC policy (Chessman & Cunliffe, 2026 pre-
publication draft), preparing to safeguard it in times of conflict. 7 One key CPP measure are the 
‘no-strike lists,’ i.e., registers of objects that should not be affected by military activity due to 
their cultural significance.
5  NATO Human Security Unit, ‘Human Security Agenda,’ 24 August 2024, p. 6.
6  Allied Command Operations (ACO). Protection of Civilians. ACO Handbook, 2021, pp. 8-11.
7  Clive Chessman and Emma Cunliffe, ‘What does it mean for Cultural Property Protection to be an item on the Human Security agenda?’ 
In: Gilder, Alexander, Hanlon, Robert J. & Christie, Kenneth. Human Security in Policy and Practice . University of Toronto Press.  
Pre-publication draft, 2026.
10
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
Two separate issues or agendas, which are nonetheless connected to human security are:
• Building Integrity (BI). While at the political level Building Integrity – NATO’s approach to 
countering corruption in its own forces and in mission area of operations – is a separate issue, 
the military structure connects it to human security. 8
• Women, Peace and Security (WPS). This is a separate, but connected agenda focused on the 
gendered impact of conflict and insecurity. The latest WPS policy, adopted in 2024, focuses on 
two pillars: increasing the participation of women at all levels of NATO forces and institutions, and 
preventing and countering violence against women and girls in conflict.9
8  ‘Cross-Cutting Topics and Human Security,’ CIMIC Handbook , CIMIC Centre of Excellence 2026, para 6.1.
9  ‘NATO Policy on Women, Peace and Security,’ 10 July 2024.
10  ‘The Future of Women, Peace and Security Belongs to America’s Allies ,’ Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and 
Security, 16 December 2025; Yalda Matin, ‘ The Rollback of the Pentagon’s Women, Peace, and Security Program: What it Means for NATO 
and the Importance of Canadian WPS Leadership ,’ NATO Association of Canada, 8 June 2026; Joseph Gedeon and Cate Brown, ‘ Pentagon 
quietly shut legally required program to prevent civilian deaths by military, watchdog finds ,’ The Guardian , 15 May 2026; Jack Detsch and 
Paul McLeary, ‘ Hegseth ignored military officials when he slashed offices that limit risk to civilians ,’ Politico, 13 March 2026.
11  NATO, ‘The Ankara Summit Declaration,’ 8 July 2026; NATO, ‘The Hague Summit Declaration,’ 25 June 2025.
12  Felicia Schwartz et al, ‘ How Trump learned to stop worrying and love NATO ,’ Politico, 25 June 2026; Jessie Yeung, ‘ NATO’s Mark Rutte 
emerges as Trump whisperer-in-chief after dramatic about-face at Davos ,’ CNN, 22 January 2026; interviews 1, 6, 12. 
13  Associated Press, ‘ NATO pulls security advisory mission out of Iraq after Iranian attacks on European bases ,’ PBS, 20 March 2026; 
Victor Jack, ‘ US presses NATO for major reset, ending mission in Iraq ,’ Politico, 19 February 2026.
14  Interviews 1, 2, 3, 5, 9.
15  NATO Human Security Unit, ‘ Human Security Agenda ,’ 24 August 2024, pp. 5, 10. 
By 2026, NATO’s commitment to human security looked 
questionable. The Trump administration criticized 
WPS and PoC approaches as ‘woke’ and harmful to the 
business of warfighting, dismantled the US military’s 
WPS programming, and gutted the Department of 
Defense’s Civilian Protection Centre of Excellence. 10 
NATO’s new Secretary General Mark Rutte appeared 
to set a course mirroring that of the US, prioritising on 
‘hard security’ and defence budgets, an unequivocal 
focus of the last two Alliance summits. 11 Key human 
security initiatives, such as an update of the 2016 PoC 
policy, were put on the back burner; teams responsible 
for human security at the political level were reshuffled 
and the resources available to them reduced, testifying 
to the de-prioritisation of human security at the political 
and strategic levels of NATO.12 The NATO Mission 
Iraq, which included a Human Security Adviser, was 
suspended following the outbreak of the US-Iran war 
in March 2026, and earlier reports indicated that the 
US was pressuring other Allies to terminate it as part of 
reining in NATO’s out-of-area commitments.13 
However, while current US policies are key to the 
implementation and resourcing of human security, 14 
laying the responsibility for its decline exclusively 
at the door of the Trump administration would miss 
other issues that have weakened the human security 
approach. These long-term, structural factors need 
to be addressed if the potential of the human security 
approach is to be fully realised. 
The focus on threats to individuals within the human 
security concept , for example, has been an awkward 
fit with a military alliance that relies on governments 
for its legitimacy and effectiveness. While NATO 
recognised the state-centred approach to security as 
“insufficient,” this was never seen as applying equally 
to out-of-area and Article V operations. 15 The 2022 
Strategic Concept stressed that human security and 
in particular CHM are “central” to NATO’s approach to 
crisis prevention and management; in the section on 
collective defence and deterrence, it committed the 
Alliance to improving national resilience and did not 
mention human security. This might have resulted in 
an implicit perception of human security as applicable 
11
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
primarily to out-of-area operations.16 In the collective 
defence context, territorial and state security is often 
equated with human security, since potential loss 
of territory to an adversary such as Russia is likely 
to expose the population to significant abuses. The 
interpretation of human security as opposed to state 
security was therefore, one interviewee suggested, 
“unhelpful” in contexts where NATO governments 
would play a leading role.17
The Alliance’s turn toward territorial defence in 
Europe therefore contributed to the de-prioritisation 
of human security in two ways. One, preparations for 
a defensive war have brought about a paradigm shift: 
the Alliance moved from working on the military’s 
support to civilian goals to securing civil support for 
the military. Accordingly, the dominant lens that the 
civil environment is currently viewed through is not 
the rights-based human security, but rather national 
resilience, a concept that is geared just as much 
toward supporting military operations as it is toward 
protecting civilians.18 Measured through seven baseline 
requirements – continuing government functions, 
managing population movements and mass casualties, 
ensuring energy supply, maintaining food and water 
security, and providing operational civil communication 
and transport systems in a crisis – the focus of 
resilience is on individual and collective obligations 
rather than individual rights, further pushing the 
human security approach into the background. 19 
Two, the focus on collective defence has reduced 
the amount of attention and resources available to 
partnerships and crisis management missions; by de-
prioritising the areas of work where human security 
was seen as a more natural fit, it reinforced its decline. 
16  NATO Strategic Concept, Preface & paragraphs 5, 26, 39; ‘Human Security: Approach and Guiding Principles,’ paragraphs 4, 7, 9; 
interviews 5, 8, 10. In previous research work focused on NATO and carried out in 2024, the author was told by NATO staff that resilience 
is to Article V preparedness what human security was to out-of-area operations. Attendance at NATO events in 2024 and 2026 suggests 
a similar conclusion: human security is perceived as helpful if governments cannot provide security, but less useful if governments 
are comparatively effective, legitimate, and focused on securing state and population security. Frontline states in particular focus on 
the state’s response to potential threats, since a comprehensive defence approach, with the civilian population supporting the state 
structures, is seen as a crucial element of securing both the state and the population in a confrontation with Russia. 
17  Interview 5. 
18  Interviews 5, 8, 10. Supported by the author’s previous research and interviewees with other stakeholders within the Alliance in 2024.
19  NATO, ‘Resilience, preparedness and Article 3 ,’ updated 13 November 2024. The Alliance’s Warfighting Capstone Concept  similarly 
recognises the necessity of civil capabilities for the success of military operations, referring to ‘zero-day integration’ between civil and 
military stakeholders. See Christoph Harig, ‘ The Future of Civil-Military Cooperation in NATO ,’ In-Depth Briefing  #83, The Centre for 
Historical Analysis and Conflict Research, 7 November 2024, p. 1.
20  Victor Jack, ‘ Top US official calls for ‘NATO 3.0’ ,’ Politico, 12 February 2026; Jack, ‘ US presses NATO for major reset, ending mission in 
Iraq;’ interview 3; background conversations with NATO stakeholders.
21  Christoph Harig, ‘ The Future of Civil-Military Cooperation in NATO ,’ In-Depth Briefing  #83, The Centre for Historical Analysis and 
Conflict Research, 7 November 2024, p. 2. 
22  ‘Human Security Agenda,’ p. 9. 
23  ‘The HN and domestic CIMIC ,’ CIMIC Handbook , CIMIC Centre of Excellence 2026, para 4.2. Author’s previous experience with NATO 
CIMIC courses confirms that securing civil support to the military as well as ‘domestic CIMIC’ are currently priorities for the Alliance, with 
human security playing a much less prominent role. 
24  NATO, AJP 3.19. Allied Joint Doctrine for Civil-Military Cooperation , Edition B Version 1, June 2025, paragraphs 1.4, 1.15, 2.9. 
Even before the NMI was suspended due to the 
deterioration of the security situation, the US vision 
of a ‘NATO 3.0’ prioritised the focus on Europe and the 
Western hemisphere, pushing for an end to ‘legacy’ 
crisis management missions in Iraq and Kosovo. While 
the NMI is likely to be redeployed as the situation 
stabilises, its numbers and mandate could be scaled 
back, and the status of its human security work strand 
is unclear.20
The turn toward collective defence has also influenced 
the focus and expectations of the civil-military 
cooperation (CIMIC) function  within NATO.21 Due to 
its focus on civilian populations and institutions, CIMIC 
became “the main area in which all human security 
topics come into play.”22 With NATO’s turn toward 
Article V preparedness, however, the priority of civil-
military cooperation branches became ‘domestic 
CIMIC,’ i.e., liaison with civilian institutions on Alliance 
territory in order to support the achievement of 
military-strategic objectives. 23 The conceptualisation of 
human security is not as a priority, but rather a “topic 
of relevance” to CIMIC, and CIMIC’s tasks related to 
human security seem to be focused on understanding 
second- and third-order effects of military operations 
on the civilian population. 24 
The human security approach has also suffered from 
a lack of clarity as to its operationalisation, uneven 
implementation, and limited expertise.  Interviewees 
argued that there is little clarity as to what human 
security is, what exactly the expectations of the 
military are, and how it is to be implemented. Many 
national militaries reportedly equate it with international 
humanitarian law and question the necessity of 
introducing additional concepts; others wonder if it 
12
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
actually obscures key issues such as protection of 
civilians.25 Some noted that this confusion is shared 
by NATO partners, who frequently prefer to talk about 
protection of civilians and civil-military relations rather 
than about human security, and whose interest is 
often directed toward preservation of economically 
significant infrastructure. 26 NATO itself has struggled 
to mainstream human security in cooperative security 
missions, partly due to limited resources and partly 
due to the positioning of human security outside the 
main chain of command, as an ‘extra’ dealt with by 
advisors. Within NMI, for example, limited resources 
and difficulties in mainstreaming human security work 
made it challenging to capitalise on important openings 
related to human security, such as the adoption of 
Iraq’s National Policy for the Protection of Civilians. 27
The five cross-cutting topics that make up human 
security – PoC, CRSV, CAAC, CTHB, and CPP – have 
not been implemented at the same time or to the 
same degree. By and large, interviewees pointed to 
PoC as the area that has been best developed, where 
the military’s tasks are relatively clear, and which has 
been incorporated into planning and exercises to the 
greatest extent.28 Individual and collective education 
and training, however, have been overall slow to 
incorporate human security; testing human trafficking 
and CRSV at the tactical level within the current 
exercise design, or creating storylines that would 
present dilemmas to the command group, have been 
major challenges. 29 
This has been compounded by diminishing availability 
of human security expertise within NATO, which 
appears to have only partially  institutionalised the 
approaches developed during counter-insurgency wars 
in Afghanistan and Iraq. As officers who participated 
in those missions begin to retire, expertise is receding: 
some personnel first encounter human security 
concepts at NATO-level tactical exercises, and a lack of 
internal military expertise means that human security 
issues are often raised by civilians outside the chain 
25  Interviews 2, 5.
26  Interviews 3, 14. 
27  United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), ‘ United Nations praises Iraq’s launch of the National Protection of Civilians Policy ,’ 
17 February 2025; PAX, ‘ The National Protection of Civilians Policy in Iraq is public!, ’ 16 January 2025; interviews 3, 9, 14; background 
conversations with NATO stakeholders.
28  Interviews 1, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 
29  Interviews 5, 8, 12, 13. 
30  Interviews 1, 8, 12, 13. 
31  Lt-Gen Charles Pede and Col Peter Hayden, ‘ The Eighteenth Gap . Preserving the Commander’s Legal Maneuver Space on “Battlefield 
Next”,’ Military Review, March-April 2021; Gilder, ‘The Usefulness of the Human Security Concept for NATO Collective Defence’; 
interviews 7, 8, 9.
32  Interviews 4, 8, 12, 13; NATO Rapid Deployable Corps (NRDC) Italy, ‘SOP J.J9.04. Operationalization of Human Security,’ 30 January 
2023. 
33  Interviews 1, 2, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14. 
34  Interviews 9, 11; ‘Human Security Agenda,’ p. 14. These documents are not public and could not be consulted.
of command.30 The applicability of the expertise and 
procedures developed in out-of-area missions to 
collective defence and large-scale combat operations 
has also been questioned, and while the human 
security community has offered arguments defending 
the applicability of the concept to all operations, 
detailed and comprehensive military guidance is not 
yet available.31 
But despite weaknesses in the human security concept, 
many stakeholders recognise its value and continue to 
push for concrete, relevant measures to operationalize 
and implement it. While the visibility of human security 
is diminishing at the political level, operational and 
tactical military headquarters continue to push for 
implementation . Two tactical headquarters – the 
United Kingdom (UK)-led Allied Rapid Reaction Corps 
(ARRC) and the NATO Rapid Deployable Corps (NRDC) 
Italy – have formalised tactical guidance on human 
security and are part of the push for NATO-wide 
standardisation. Human security advisers and CIMIC 
staff continue to find ways to mainstream human 
security concerns in planning and exercises, and 
there are some success stories: in a recent exercise, 
a storyline requiring reconciliation of humanitarian 
imperatives with control of weapons flows became the 
preoccupation of the highest levels of command. 32 
None of the stakeholders interviewed for this project 
questioned the importance of protection of civilians 
and cultural property protection, and a majority 
pointed to PoC and CPP as the cross-cutting topics 
with clear relevance to Article V preparedness and 
to national resilience .33 The links between PoC and 
resilience as mutually reinforcing have been noted, 
and NATO’s resilience-related guidance and host 
nation agreements reportedly contain provisions on 
protection of the population. 34 While the focus on 
FABN and C-SASE has come to be seen as largely 
the prerogative of the host nation, development 
of other components of the PoC framework – 
understanding the civil environment and mitigating 
13
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
harm – is ongoing. Preventing and mitigating harm 
in targeting processes, for example, is largely 
accepted as a military task at the tactical level, and 
ongoing adaptation of NATO’s strategic targeting 
guidance incorporates harm mitigation and input from 
specialized non-governmental organisations (NGOs). 35 
More generally, considerations related to protecting 
civilians and the civil environment are incorporated 
into work on understanding the civil environment; 
incorporation of protection concerns into civil-
military planning and resilience considerations; and 
synchronisation of civil-military planning through work 
with governments, international organisations (IOs) and 
NGOs for the purpose of multi-domain operations. 36 
New initiatives in professional military education 
could also help replenish the human security expertise 
pool. The Partnership for Peace Consortium, which 
most NATO national defence academies participate in, 
recently formed a Human Security Working Group and 
linked human security to resilience and comprehensive 
defence. Their work could help inject human security 
into national military education, and to introduce 
comparable standards across the Alliance. 37 The 
Finnish Defence Forces International Centre (FINCENT), 
NATO’s academic lead for human security and related 
disciplines, is currently revising the content of its 
PoC course and working with partners to design a 
course on CPP, both with content relevant to Article V 
preparedness. 38
In partnership work, human security continues to 
feature in lessons identified from Ukraine, where the 
civilian population has been both a target of deliberate 
attacks and a key factor enabling Ukraine’s defence. 39 
Issues related to PoC form part of the workplan of the 
NATO-Ukraine Joint Analysis, Training and Education 
Centre in Bydgoszcz, Poland, and conversations 
with NATO stakeholders suggest that the Alliance 
is looking to Ukraine to understand the significance 
of the civil environment for the country’s overall 
resilience and military ability. 40 More generally, while 
some partners focus on specific concerns related to 
infrastructure, others – especially countries tackling 
direct threats to their populations – continue to show 
interest in improving outcomes for civilians; Iraq’s 
35  Interviews 7, 9; background conversations at NATO events. 
36  Interviews 1, 9. 
37  Interviews 1, 2; Partnership for Peace Consortium, ‘ PfPC Capstone in Gdynia Examines the Human Dimensions of Contemporary Armed 
Conflict ,’ 7 January 2026.
38  Interviews 9, 10; background conversations during NATO events in 2026. 
39  Marta Kepe, Alyssa Demus, ‘ Resisting Russia.  Insights into Ukraine’s Civilian-Based Actions During the First Four Months of the War in 
2022,’ RAND Corporation, 15 August 2023.
40  Interviews 5, 15; background conversations at NATO events in 2026. 
41  Interview 3.
recently adopted National Policy for the Protection of 
Civilians is one example.41
14
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
4. Human security: 
why invest 
in it now?
Despite the weaknesses and uneven 
implementation of the concept, de-
prioritisation of human security is 
problematic. In the first instance, 
it could reinforce the incorrect 
perception of a potential Article V 
operation as fought in a battlespace 
fully subordinated to military goals 
and devoid of civilians, who are 
assumed to have left.42 Exclusive 
reliance on the resilience concept 
would focus NATO’s lens on 
governments, reducing its awareness 
of the populations. A force that 
loses the population-focused lens 
loses the ability to understand not 
only its own impact on civilians, 
but also the significance of civilian 
conduct, attitudes, and abilities. 
42  Interviews 12, 13. Borne out by the author’s previous research conducted in 2024. 
43  Interviews 3, 7, 12, 13, 15; Gilder, ‘The Usefulness of the Human Security Concept for NATO Collective Defence.’
Tempting as it may be to think of 
a potential Article V scenario as a 
‘metal-on-metal’ confrontation, the 
defence of Ukraine shows that this 
is a very unlikely outcome. Article 
V operations would take place in 
a civilian environment, among 
governments that have obligations 
toward their populations and that 
are concerned with protecting 
civilians, and against an adversary 
with a history of targeting civilians.43
Better understanding of the 
civil environment, risks to 
civilians, and civilian agency
In this context, human security offers a lens for 
understanding the population that could complement 
assessments based on resilience benchmarks and on 
15
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
national ‘total’ or ‘comprehensive defence’ policies. 44 
While the resilience approach and comprehensive 
defence policies assume that civilians would offer 
support to the armed forces, human security could help 
NATO governments understand which groups would be 
supportive and in what way: some could, for example, 
offer direct support to the armed forces, others could 
opt for participation in civil protection, yet others would 
evacuate, and a minority might remain neutral. It would 
also help NATO and Allied governments understand 
the level of support available to the armed forces 
and map out potential threats to civilians in all 
relevant scenarios, including risks related to direct 
participation in hostilities (as well as those related to 
not participating) and any trade-offs included in the 
choices that civilians will make. 45 Human security would 
also enable the Alliance to see civilians as actively 
shaping their own protection measures , which would 
in turn enable them to better support those measures 
and, where needed, deconflict them from military lines 
of effort.
[The] concept [of self-protection] is based on 
a recognition that civilians have agency during 
crises and regularly make decisions or act in 
ways that mitigate the threat of physical harm 
to themselves or their communities […] In [an] 
extremely challenging context, Ukrainian civilians 
have shown remarkable resilience, as well as the 
ability to protect themselves while providing for 
the needs of the most vulnerable members of their 
communities. Such self-protection efforts have 
been critical for survival, filling the gaps where 
more formal protection actors have struggled to 
respond quickly or comprehensively enough to 
meet civilians’ needs. 46
Balancing civilian and 
military needs
A collective defence scenario is also one in which 
human security, and especially PoC, would be a whole-
of-government preoccupation. Given the need to 
continue services for the population and offer support 
for the armed forces, it would be the task of NATO 
44  See for example Ieva Berzina, ‘From “total” to “comprehensive” national defence: the development of the concept in Europe ,’  
Journal on Baltic Security  6(2), 2020, pp. 1-9.
45  See Ruben Stewart, ‘ From “total war” to “total defence”: tracing the origins of civilian involvement in armed conflict ,’  
Humanitarian Law & Policy , ICRC, 30 April 2025.
46  Center for Civilians in Conflict, ‘ Self-Protection in Practice: Ukrainian Efforts to Avoid Harm During Russian Invasion ,’ 2023, p. 2.
47  Interview 15; Gilder, ‘The Usefulness of the Human Security Concept for NATO Collective Defence,’ p. 2.
48  PAX, ‘Civilian harm response : Recommendations for a civilian-centred civilian harm response process,’ Protection Series 8/2023;  
PAX, ‘Community-level responses to harm: Lessons from Hawija ,’ 4 April 2025; Center for Civilians in Conflict, Guiding Principles for 
Community-Based Amends , November 2025.
governments to maintain long-term balance of civilian 
and military needs , reconciling military operations with 
protecting civilians to the maximum extent possible. As 
noted in NATO’s guidance, the Alliance could use force 
to protect civilians from the actions of the adversary, 
an issue that would very likely be a part of an Article 
V scenario. This means that military operations need 
to be planned with the situation of civilians in mind, 
and that governments would need to work with the 
armed forces on the employment of direct protection 
measures – for example the placement and use of air 
defences – and, again, on balancing those with military 
needs. To make those decisions, an analysis led by 
the human security approach – including a focus on 
population vulnerabilities – would provide a useful 
lens. It would also help the Alliance plan and provide 
resources for those in extremis situations when it 
might be required to respond to humanitarian needs , 
supporting national governments, other regional 
organisations, and national and international NGOs. 47
Mitigating and responding 
to civilian harm
NATO’s continued focus on mitigating civilian harm 
through targeting protocols is welcome and should 
be continued. Lessons from post-9/11 operations 
should be adapted to shape targeting protocols 
and other guidance, including Battle Damage and 
Collateral Damage Estimates. It should, however, 
be complemented with attention to other aspects 
of addressing civilian harm, in particular response 
to harm that occurs despite precautions. Previous 
research conducted by NGOs suggests that a lack 
of acknowledgment or response to harm , or a 
response that does not match survivors’ needs can 
leave lasting scars in communities, endanger civil-
military relations, and decrease the legitimacy and 
effectiveness of military forces in the longer term. 48 
In an Article V scenario, response to civilian harm 
would likely fall to national governments, with different 
scope of assistance and varying legal provisions and 
procedures. For cases when harm is caused by the 
activity of friendly forces, a deeper understanding of 
national processes and priorities, as well as NATO-
16
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
level harm tracking and response processes, would 
be significant enablers. Equally, NATO personnel need 
to be able to act as first responders in cases involving 
human trafficking or CRSV.  
Continuing the work 
on human security 
in partnerships
Working on human security in the collective defence 
context would also help develop the expertise 
necessary to inform cooperative security and crisis 
response outside NATO’s territory. The Alliance’s 
current partnership with Ukraine offers an opportunity 
to identify approaches and practices that support 
societal resilience, improve outcomes for civilians, and 
contribute to military operations; in particular, it would 
allow NATO to better understand the challenges related 
to protecting critical infrastructure. Since this is an area 
that is of interest to many NATO partners, it could help 
open doors to more comprehensive initiatives in the 
future, including protection concerns where civilian 
populations are under threat. 49
Investing in human 
security inter-operability
Investing in human security at a NATO level would 
help incentivise the adoption of comparable 
standards across Allied militaries. Some countries, 
such as the UK, have an independent human security 
mainstreaming plan; their interest in the concept 
precedes that of NATO and their national-level work 
is likely to continue. Other NATO members, such 
as Canada, appear to be in a ‘holding’ pattern, not 
dismantling what it achieved in human security, but 
also not developing it; yet others are finding it difficult 
to assign resources to human security in the current 
international environment, where the very survival 
of NATO is at stake. For countries that often model 
their military doctrine and education on Alliance 
standards, a lack of operationalization of human 
security is likely to remove it from the radar, making it 
more difficult for them to show up on the battlefield 
with interoperable processes and approaches. In 
this context, international initiatives in professional 
military education could allow NATO states to develop 
49  Interviews 6, 15. 
50  Interviews 1, 2, 4, 6, 7.
a comprehensive and comparable set of approaches 
backed up by expertise that sits squarely within the 
chain of command. 50
17
How to safeguard human security amid changing NATO priorities
 Photo: A Dutch soldier conducts an urban assault training to prepare for collective defence scenarios in Lithuania, as part of NATO 
training for the enhanced Forward Presence battlegroup. (source: NATO/Flickr).
18
5. Conclusion: 
the way forward 
for human security 
within NATO
While the importance of human 
security seems to have receded 
over the last year to two, the 
concept continues to highlight a 
population-centric perspective that 
complements NATO’s current focus 
on resilience and comprehensive 
defence. Drawing attention to 
civilians – their agency, their 
vulnerabilities, and their readiness 
to support civil preparedness and 
military operations – human security 
enables NATO to not only better 
understand and respond to civilian 
needs, but also to better plan its own 
operations and to structure civil-
military interactions more effectively. 
A pathway for external organisations 
to engage with and better understand 
NATO, human security is far from a 
concern only for low-intensity, out-
of-area operations supporting fragile 
government; it does, however, need 
to be adapted for collective defence 
conducted on NATO’s own territory, 
where state security often reinforces 
human security and where civilians 
are likely to be not only agents of their 
own protection, but also of support 
for military operations. Integrating 
human security in preparedness 
for Article V operations would not 
only help mainstream it, but also 
build the expertise needed to assist 
NATO partners in the future. 
While NATO’s current focus on collective defence 
presents some challenges for the human security 
approach, it also brings opportunities for the Alliance 
and the organisations that are likely to interact with it 
in future missions. Collective defence and the whole-
of-society approach that it entails could help lift human 
security out of its current position as an add-on, and 
make it an integral part of resilience considerations 
and military planning – something that interviewees 
have suggested is already happening. As NATO’s 
liaison network is evolving to include national NGOs in 
addition to international humanitarian organisations, 
it is creating a better picture of the organisations that 
19
would be involved in a collective defence scenario 
and developing further opportunities for dipping into 
expertise amassed outside formal Alliance structures, 
especially on understanding the civil environment 
and preventing and responding to civilian harm. 51 It is 
also an opportunity for civilian organisations to shape 
Alliance approaches and procedures. To maximise 
those opportunities, NGOs and other organisations 
need to apply human security in contexts where it 
might be linked to state and government security, and 
where the resilience of governments and their control 
of territory might well be a protective measure for 
civilians, who might otherwise need to evacuate or be 
subjected to reprisals from the adversary’s occupation 
authorities. Potential gains for civilians make this an 
area worthy of a sustained effort. 
51  Interviews 9, 15. 
20
Make peace work.
PAX Netherlands Peace Foundation
Sint Jacobsstraat 12 
3511 BS Utrecht 
The Netherlands
+31 (0)30 - 233 33 46 
info@paxvoorvrede.nl 
paxforpeace.nl