Deadlocked, dysfunctional and dangerous. That is how the 
Strait of Hormuz
 standoff is increasingly being described.


Now approaching its fourth month, the crisis off 
Iran's
 coast is marked by mutual blockades. Tehran has been charging ships up to $2 million (€1.73 million) for safe passage through the strait, while the United States enforces a naval embargo, turning back vessels carrying Iranian oil exports.


These competing blockades have failed to deliver decisive results. Some Iranian ships continue to slip through, while several Asian shipping firms have agreed to pay tolls, despite such fees violating international maritime law.


Fragile negotiations between the US and Iran to reopen Hormuz have, meanwhile, stuttered several times, sparking the risk of escalation into a 
wider regional conflict
.


Which side will fold first?


Yet, despite Pakistan-led mediation efforts and a proposed one-page memorandum aimed at ending hostilities and reopening Hormuz, neither side appears ready to blink first.


Dania Thafer, executive director of the Washington-based think tank Gulf International Forum (GIF), believes Trump’s on-off military threats — intended to increase its leverage over Iran — may have backfired.


"The Iranian response suggests the opposite," Thafer told DW. "They interpret it as the US lacking the will to escalate the war."


US President 
Donald Trump
 is facing increasing pressure both at home and abroad to avoid further military action, with Gulf allies such as 
Saudi Arabia
, the 
United Arab Emirates
 and 
Qatar
 urging restraint. Surging oil prices and rising domestic inflation are adding political heat ahead of the US mid-term elections in November.
Can Iran control flow of data along with flow of oil?
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that 
supports HTML5 video


Iran's oil revenues depleting fast


Iran, meanwhile, is losing some $435 million per day in trade, nearly two-thirds of which comes from exports of mainly crude oil, Miad Maleki, senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies (FDD), estimated in April.


This means that with the US blockade stretching to 39 days on Friday, Iran's public finances have already suffered an estimated $17 billion loss. According to Maleki, this is in addition to around $144 billion in economic damage caused by US-Israeli strikes in the first weeks of the war.




Burcu Ozcelik, senior research fellow at the London-based Royal United Services Institute (RUSI), thinks Iran may have gained "outsized leverage" through its missile attacks on shipping and Gulf neighbors, but it is now being "hit hard" by the disruption to its own oil exports.


"Despite Tehran's bluster about regime resilience, its economy is not blockade-proof," Ozcelik told DW.


Gulf states caught in the crossfire


Experts describe the standoff as a dangerous waiting game. Both the US and Iran believe they have 
time on their side
. However, the Gulf states are far more risk-averse and economically exposed.


Their frustration with the deadlock has hardened into 
coordinated pressure
 for a diplomatic breakthrough. Gulf states have urged Trump to shelve plans for further strikes and give negotiations more time.


In private, they've warned that a frozen conflict would jeopardize plans to transition their economies away from fossil fuels. Gulf states have been spending hundreds of billions of dollars on ambitious industrial and tourism projects.


They strongly support the Pakistan‑mediated talks and a joint US–UN initiative to reopen the Strait without Iranian tolls or control claims.
How the Iran war has ruined Saudi Arabia's 'Vision 2030'
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that 
supports HTML5 video


Iran seeks regional security hegemony


As a power that sees itself reshaping the Middle East region, Iran is also using the war to push for long‑term gains. GIF's Thafer thinks Iran's ambitions go well beyond war victory and seek to "flip the regional order in its favor" in the long term.


"They want the Gulf states to expel the US and bring the region under an Iranian security framework," she told DW, adding that this approach is not in the interest of Gulf states, despite their frustrations with Washington.


While remaining cautiously optimistic about a breakthrough in talks, Washington insists on a full reopening of the Strait, an end to all Iranian nuclear enrichment activity and no sanctions relief without major concessions. US Secretary of State Marco Rubio told NATO foreign ministers gathered in Sweden on Friday that "we have to have a Plan B" if Iran does not compromise.


"The challenge is that there is no magic target that the US can hit that will immediately translate into regime surrender," Ozcelik told DW. "If civilian infrastructure is targeted, this may trigger Tehran to execute a harsher retaliation against Gulf states."
Hundreds of tankers and cargo ships are waiting for Hormuz to fully reopen
Image: Majid Asgaripour/WANA/REUTERS


Among Iranians, the pain worsens


Tehran maintains it will stand firm, despite the growing hardship facing ordinary Iranians, which is unlikely to ease soon.


"Tehran's various proposals to extract fees for transiting the Strait of Hormuz or charging for undersea cables is indicative of the realization by some pragmatic voices in Tehran that the Iranian economy and its people are in for a protracted period of hardship, even if sanction relief is somehow agreed," Ozcelik said.


Annual inflation in Iran has surged above 54%, with prices for some food products more than doubling. A nationwide 
internet blackout
 has lasted more than 80 days, further isolating citizens and crippling daily life.


"While Trump sees this [winning the war] as part of his presidential legacy, the Iranians view it as a matter of regime survival and the future of their country," Thafer underlined.


Edited by: Srinivas Mazumdaru