Iran has not yet revealed all of its military capabilities and remains fully prepared for any scenario, including direct confrontation with the US and NATO, senior IRGC military official Brigadier General MohammadJafar Asadi said.










ADVERTISEMENT














ADVERTISEMENT








“We have repeatedly said that we have not yet revealed all of our trump cards. There are many capabilities and options that remain undisclosed, and if necessary, we will use them,” Asadi, who serves as deputy inspector of the Khatam al-Anbiya Central Headquarters, told Iranian state-run television on Tuesday.


According to Asadi, Tehran “has no problem with war”. “When surrender is not an option, then war lies ahead," he said, warning that NATO involvement would not alter Iran’s readiness.


In further remarks, Asadi said Iran’s military posture remains at the highest level of readiness, adding that any renewed conflict would differ in “the nature of operations, geography of the battlefield, and types of weapons used.”


“The Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps is fully prepared for all possible scenarios,” he added.


The Khatam al-Anbiya Central Headquarters is Iran’s main centralised wartime command centre, overseeing strategic military operations across the armed forces under the broader authority of the IRGC and the ayatollah.


Negotiations in uncertainty


At the diplomatic level, uncertainty continued over a pause in indirect Iran–US communications aimed at reaching a preliminary understanding on nuclear and regional issues.


Iranian state-linked Fars news outlet reported that no messages are currently being exchanged between Tehran and Washington, and that talks aimed at an initial framework have been paused for several days.


Saeed Ajorlou, a member of the Iranian negotiating team’s media unit, said proposals are still under review by Iran’s Supreme National Security Council and expert committees, with no final decision taken.


A separate source cited by Mehr news agency said Iran is still evaluating a draft agreement but is insisting on “tangible benefits and enforceable guarantees” before moving forward, citing mistrust of previous US commitments.


Meanwhile, US Secretary of State Marco Rubio said Washington remains engaged in talks with Tehran. 


“US discussions with Iran may now cover aspects of their nuclear programme that, just a month ago or even a year ago, they were unwilling to even discuss,” Rubio said.


However, he cautioned that the progress in talks does not guarantee a breakthrough or a mutually acceptable agreement.


“That is not a guarantee it will ultimately lead to a deal that’s acceptable,” Rubio added.


US President Donald Trump said on Monday evening that negotiations with Tehran have continued "at a rapid pace" despite Iran's claims to the contrary.


Competing factions within Iran’s power structure


Iranian decision-making structure is significantly influenced by competing factions within Tehran's establishment, particularly circles affiliated with the IRGC.


Among those, IRGC's acting Commander-in-Chief, Ahmad Vahidi, has been identified as one of the key figures advocating a hardline approach to negotiations. 


He is said to belong to a highly exclusive circle that maintains direct contact with Ayatollah Mojtaba Khamenei, the new leader of the Islamic Republic who has remained out of public view since the US-Israeli strikes on Iran on 28 February.


According to the latest joint assessment by the Washington-based Institute for the Study of War (ISW) and The Critical Threats Project (CTP) at the American Enterprise Institute, Vahidi and his close associates were behind the decision to suspend Iran–US negotiations on Monday.


Speaker of Iran's parliament and head of Tehran's negotiating team, Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf, is seen as representing a more pragmatic approach and has shown greater flexibility in the talks so far.


By pausing brokered negotiations, Tehran has further linked its decisions to its proxies in the region, especially the most powerful component of what Iran calls the Axis of Resistance, the Lebanese Shia militant group Hezbollah, which remains at war with Israel.


The axis is a network of armed groups across the Middle East, including Hamas in Gaza, Houthis in Yemen and Shia militias in Iraq that Tehran finances, arms and directs.


Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi has said that the Iran-US ceasefire framework “unequivocally” covers all fronts, including Lebanon, warning that violations in one arena could affect the broader arrangement.


Ghalibaf has also accused the US of failing to uphold the ceasefire and contributing to regional instability.