Key events
Starmer’s proposed timetable
 – with the nomination process starting on 9 July – 
could be intended to coincide with the Nato summit in Ankara,
 ending the day before.
UK prime minister Starmer announces plans to resign from post
Oof.
Over in the UK, 
Keir Starmer has announced his intention to resign from the post of the leader of the Labour Party and the British prime minister.
Prime minister Keir Starmer announces his resignation outside 10 Downing Street in London.
 Photograph: James Veysey/Shutterstock
He 
wants the party to set out a timetable with nominations for his successor
 opening on 9 July, and to be completed by the summer recess. If there is a contest on who should succeed him, 
he hopes it will be completed before the parliament returns in September.
Starmer will stay on in post until the process is complete.
He is 
the sixth British PM out of the job in the 10 years since the Brexit referendum in 2016,
 the anniversary of which is tomorrow.
And a group of protesters outside 10 Downing Street are playing the EU’s anthem, Beethoven’s Ode to Joy, on a loudspeaker as he speaks.
More details on our UK live blog:
Share
Updated at 
04.40 EDT
Ukraine and Poland's bitter dispute over past casts shadow on contemporary relations
Separately, 
Ukraine and Poland are embroiled in a bitter dispute over Kyiv’s decision to rename a contemporary Ukrainian army unit after the Ukrainian Insurgent Army (UPA).
Poland holds it responsible for ethnic killings of up to 100,000 Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia during the second world war – and in 2016 adopted 
a parliamentary resolution calling it a genocide
 – but it is celebrated in Ukraine for their fight for Ukrainian independence and resistance against the Soviet forces.
Karol Nawrocki and Volodymyr Zelenskyy walk past the honour guards during a welcome ceremony at the Presidential Palace in Warsaw, Poland last year.
 Photograph: Omar Marques/Getty Images
On Friday, 
Polish president Karol Nawrocki 
stripped Volodymyr Zelenskyy of the country’s top honour
 
in retaliation for the move
,
 prompting three former Ukrainian presidents and other senior officials ⁠to also return their state awards to Poland.
Announcing his decision on Friday night, Nawrocki 
said
:


“
Poland has repeatedly signalled the particular importance of this issue to the Ukrainian side.
 We conveyed our position and expectation that the consequences of this decision for relations between our states be reconsidered. Ultimately, the position of the Ukrainian side did not change. History should not be an obstacle to the future, but a good future can only be built on truth.”


In an interview posted on X last night, Zelenskyy said Ukraine and Poland cannot ​be “anything but ​partners and friends,” 
but warned that a ​political struggle could end in a “very dangerous escalation.”
But he blamed the Polish president for the conflict, claiming he is on political manoeuvres ahead of Poland’s 2027 parliamentary elections.
“Our service members ​choose a ‌heroic name for ​their unit themselves, ​and as president and supreme commander-in-chief, I must support them,” he said. “
Without Ukraine, no one will be able to defend Poland.
 It is simply impossible.”
Poland’s pro-European prime minister Donald Tusk
 – who previously distanced himself from Nawrocki’s decision – 
said that rekindling the old disagreements was “a strategic mistake
 that will harm both sides: business-wise, geopolitically, and reputationally.”
Zelenskyy was widely expected to attend the Ukraine Recovery Conference in the Polish city of Gdańsk later this week, but this is no longer certain, putting the hosts in a potentially embarrasing position of having to talk about Ukraine without its leader.
One to watch this week.
Share
Updated at 
04.11 EDT
Morning opening: Ukrainian drones briefly disrupt Moscow's airports as Zelenskyy pledges to 'bring war back to Russia'
Nearly 60 Ukrainian drones were intercepted heading for Moscow last night, forcing the capital’s airports to briefly suspend its operations during the attack.
In total, Russia 
reportedly
 downed just over 300 drones across the country.
Meanwhile, 
a Russian drone attack killed ⁠three members ⁠of ​one family,
 including ⁠a 13-year-old boy, in ⁠Ukraine’s northern ​Sumy ‌region, regional ‌prosecutors said, as quoted by Reuters.
A firefighter works at the site of a Russian drone strike, amid Russia's attack on Ukraine, in the Sumy region.
 Photograph: State Emergency Service of Ukraine/Reuters
Last night, 
Ukraine’s president 
Volodymyr Zelenskyy
 said in an interview that “our defence industry, our defence forces … have begun the process of bringing the war back to Russia.”


“The Russians are attacking us every day – and we will strike back every day. 
Our response will grow stronger with each passing day.”


It is 
the latest sign of the momentum shifting
 in the Russian aggression of Ukraine, as discussed by the G7 and EU leaders last week.
Elsewhere, 
I will be 
obviously
 keeping an eye on the UK where prime minister Keir Starmer could announce plans for his exit from the post today,
 on the eve of the 10th anniversary of the Brexit referendum in 2016.
Our main UK coverage, led by 
Andrew Sparrow,
 is here:
But I will be also 
looking at yet another day of extreme temperatures across Europe
, two 
high-profile diplomatic spats
 between Trump and Italy’s Meloni and Zelenskyy and Poland’s Nawrocki, and other news lines from across the continent.
It’s 
Monday, 22 June 2026
, it’s 
Jakub Krupa
 here, and this is 
Europe Live
.
Good morning.