Key events
Myki goes contactless from today
In exciting news for those of us in Victoria, Myki is going contactless from today on rail lines.
As my colleague 
Benita Kolovos
 reported yesterday, from today, commuters on the Cranbourne-Pakenham, Frankston and Stony Point, Sandringham, Sunbury, Werribee and Williamstown lines, as well as Bendigo, Gippsland and Geelong V/line services, will be able to bypass using a physical Myki card in favour of paying via a debit or credit card, smartphone or smartwatch.
The technology only supports full adult fares, so seniors, students and healthcare card holders must stick to their concession Myki cards if they wish to still receive their discounted rates.
The Alamein and Glen Waverley, Belgrave and Lilydale, Mernda and Hurstbridge lines will switch on next Sunday.
Trams and buses are still TBA, so you will need to keep your Myki card for a little while longer on those forms of transport (unless you use the Android version of Myki which has allowed such payments for a while).
Read more:
Greens call for longer inquiry into NDIS changes
The Greens senator 
David Shoebridge
 says the Greens would like a longer inquiry than the one currently before the parliament into the NDIS cuts in the federal budget.
He told ABC’s Insiders program he had not seen any offer from the government to support a longer inquiry in exchange for passing tax changes the but Greens would like a longer inquiry than the one currently on hand.
He said:


double quotation mark
Tens of billions [of dollars are] being taken away from families, from people who desperately rely [on it], and we are absolutely committed to getting a longer inquiry.


The Coalition and Labor and One Nation joined together to do this short inquiry.


I think it’s June it’s due to report, which is, what, late next week?


That way you can get to the bottom of the impacts of taking tens billions of dollars of support away from people in an inquiry time.


We are committed to doing what we can actually use that time to some of these brutal Labor’s proposing on NDIS.


He said the Greens were pressuring the government to wind back some of the existing tax benefits that have been grandfathered in for those who already benefit from them.


double quotation mark
Everybody who already owns property, whether they have five, 10, or 100 investment properties, they keep all of their tax benefits and young people, renters, people with nothing, they get absolutely nothing out of this budget.


Greens senator David Shoebridge.
 Photograph: Bianca de Marchi/AAP
Share
Updated at 
20.08 EDT
Australia should have ‘realistic’ view of China, Shoebridge says
The Greens’ defence spokesperson, 
senator David Shoebridge
, has said Australia should have a realistic view of China, its military force and have a frank and honest relationship about human rights and trade.
He told ABC’s Insiders program Australia should not “go down a warpath with Washington” against China.
He said:


double quotation mark
I see a role for us working with our neighbours and working and prevent global conflicts shutting regions.


Shoebridge said Australia does not need nuclear-powered submarines, criticising the Aukus program.


double quotation mark
Why are we inviting ourselves to a US war with China by buying platforms and making our defence force an interoperable part of the US?


He said underwater drones and crewed platforms for a defensive purpose could do the job.
Share
Updated at 
20.04 EDT
One Nation housing confusion a sign of party ‘chaos’: Rishworth
The confusion and mixed-messaging from One Nation MPs about their housing policy is a sign of the “chaos” that the party brings, according to the Labor minister 
Amanda Rishworth
.
In an 
embarrassing 24-hours for the rightwing populist party,
 MPs struggled to explain if it wanted to force permanent residents to sell their homes after 
Barnaby Joyce
 initially suggested it did.
After what was described as a “train-wreck” radio interview on 2GB, the One Nation senator 
Sean Bell
 eventually clarified that permanent residents would not be affected.
Instead, One Nation wants to ban foreigners and temporary visa holders from buying properties and give existing owners two years to sell-up.
Speaking to Sky News on Sunday, Rishworth said:


double quotation mark
Look, it really demonstrated to me just the confusion that One Nation has and the chaos potentially that One Nation will bring. I mean, we didn’t just have Barnaby Joyce, there were other members of One Nation that couldn’t answer the question, couldn’t tell us how much it’s going to cost, excuses about why that couldn’t be costed. So, to be honest, I think if One Nation wants to be taken seriously, they’ve got to do the work and, unfortunately, what we saw here was One Nation being able to identify a problem but be absolutely chaotic in what that solution could look like.


Rishworth also took aim at 
Pauline Hanson
 after she claimed – incorrectly – that One Nation was unable to use the Parliamentary Budget Office (PBO) to cost its policies before the last election because it didn’t have enough members to be considered a formal party.


double quotation mark
If One Nation wants to be taken seriously they need to act like a serious party, just not making things up on the run.


Amanda Rishworth.
 Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP
Share
Updated at 
19.38 EDT
NSW government proposes extending Sydney Opera House outdoor hours
The New South Wales government has said it will increase the maximum capacity for outdoor events from 5,000 to 6,000 people for low and medium-scale events, and from 6,000 to 7,000 for major events as part of changes for the Sydney Opera House.
The late-night sound levels for major events will be increased to be consistent with maximum levels allowed earlier in the day and event hours will be increased across all days of the week.
The NSW government said this will increase community engagement and participation by supporting major events, and improve audience experience, and the commercial viability for concerts.
The proposed changes will be out for public exhibition from today until 7 July.
The minister for the arts and night-time economy, 
John Graham
, said:


double quotation mark
No longer will noise levels at the Sydney Opera House forecourt be dictated by the bedtimes of the residents at ‘the Toaster’.


Over the decades it became a Sydney sport to move in next door to a pub and then campaign to close it down. We are putting an end to that and the same approach should apply to the world’s greatest performance venue.


The Sydney Opera House is everyone’s house and these changes make sure the experience matches the epic setting.


Eden Porter, Danta Whitham, Chantelle Lee Lockhart, Eli Clarke and Kallum Goolagong of Bangarra Dance Theatre outside the Sydney Opera House.
 Photograph: Don Arnold/WireImage
Share
Updated at 
19.19 EDT
Liberals appoint new top strategist
The Nationals party director, 
Lincoln Folo
, has been appointed the Liberals’ new top strategist, tasked with helping to rebuild its campaign machine after two thumping federal election defeats.
Folo was late on Friday announced as the replacement for 
Andrew Hirst
, who stepped down after three elections in the role.
In a statement announcing the appointment, the new 
Liberal party
 president, 
Tony Abbott
, said:


double quotation mark
Lincoln brings extensive experience in political campaigning, organisational leadership and party administration. He has earned a strong reputation as a capable and effective operator, committed to the values and principles that have long underpinned our party.


Abbott thanked Hirst for this “sterling service” to the Liberal party, which included masterminding 
Scott Morrison
’s surprise win in 2019.
Share
Updated at 
18.56 EDT
Good morning and welcome to the live blog for Sunday 7 June.

 I’m 
Josh Taylor
 and I’ll be bringing you the news for today.
The Liberals have appointed a new top strategist as the new federal president, 
Tony Abbott
, begins to make his mark on the party.
Australians have borrowing $5.1bn in personal loans from banks in the first three months of this year, a tripling since 2021.

 The Queensland LNP government is being accused of purging First Nations officials, policies and programs in what is being dubbed “project invisibility” by public servants.
The NSW government is planning to expand the capacity for outdoor events at the Sydney Opera House, increase noise levels and operating hours, in what the state government says will increase community engagement and be a better audience experience at the venue.
And the Socceroos have drawn 1-1 with Switzerland in their final World Cup warm-up in San Diego.

 Let’s get into it.