Published On 5 Jun 2026
5 Jun 2026
French anti-terrorism prosecutors say they have opened a preliminary investigation into suspected “torture” and “war crimes” over Israel’s alleged mistreatment of French activists who took part in a Gaza-bound aid flotilla last month.
The probe was opened on Friday following 
a referral from the foreign ministry
 late last month, said the national counterterrorism prosecutor’s office (PNAT), after activists on the Global Sumud Flotilla accused Israeli authorities of severe 
mistreatment
 during their detention.
Recommended Stories 
list of 3 items
end of list
Israel abducted and detained some 430 activists from about 40 countries after intercepting them in international waters on May 18 as they made the latest in a string of attempts to break the blockade on Gaza, which the United Nations and human rights organisations say is illegal, describing it as a form of collective punishment.
Israeli far-right National Security Minister Itamar Ben-Gvir 
attracted widespread condemnation
 after he posted a video mocking the flotilla activists while they were bound.
France banned Ben-Gvir
 from entry and, like several other allies of Israel, summoned the Israeli ambassador over the incident.
Several French activists described what they said was a violent and humiliating ordeal when eight of them returned to France on May 22.
Two of the more than 30 French people who were on board the flotilla were still hospitalised in Turkiye, they told reporters.
One returnee described a soldier groping and slapping her in a dark container, and being terrified that she would be raped.
Another recounted detained activists being put in what she called a “stress position”, on their knees with their foreheads on the ground for several hours, while the Israeli national anthem played on repeat.
‘Most severe case of ill-treatment’ in a decade
Speaking to Al Jazeera late last month, Suhad Bishara, legal director at Adalah, the Israeli legal centre for Palestinian rights, said that without accountability, Israel will continue to use violence against activists.
“Based on accounts received, and drawing on over a decade of representing flotilla participants, this appears to be the most severe case of ill-treatment documented in the past 10 years, potentially amounting to torture,” said Bishara.
Adalah lawyers have been informed of repeated physical violence resulting in serious injuries, prolonged stress positions, and sexual humiliation and harassment.
The Global Sumud Flotilla said it has documented at least 15 cases of sexual abuse.
Lawyers for French flotilla activists have said they plan to file a separate complaint on behalf of their clients over allegations of rape, torture and humiliation.
The activists have refused to meet with the French government to discuss their experiences, accusing it of supporting Israel’s 
genocidal war
 on Gaza.
Asked by the AFP news agency to respond to the claims of mistreatment, the Israeli prison service said the accusations were “entirely without factual basis”.
Francesca Albanese, an outspoken UN expert on the Palestinian territory, has said the treatment of the flotilla activists “is a luxury compared to what is inflicted on Palestinians in Israeli prisons”.