05/06/2026 - 12:39
Von der Leyen says Russian ​war ‌against ‌Ukraine ​is a ​direct ​threat ​to ​countries on ⁠⁠eastern ​border


Russia's ​war against Ukraine is ​becoming a threat for all the countries on the ​EU's ‌eastern border, ⁠European Commission President Ursula von ‌der Leyen said after ⁠a drone hit Romania's Black Sea port of ​Constanta on Friday.
"Our ‌solidarity with every member state exposed to ‌these threats is absolute," von ​der Leyen said in a post on X.






05/06/2026 - 12:26
 EU welcomes Zelensky call for direct talks with Putin 


The EU on Friday backed Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky's call for direct talks in a letter to Russian leader Vladimir Putin.
"We welcome President Zelensky's call for direct negotiations and also the call for a ceasefire -- and from our side, we will go once more through the facts, and this is that Ukraine wants peace, Europe wants peace," EU spokeswoman Anitta Hipper said. 






05/06/2026 - 12:20
Maritime drone part of group of five, says Ukraine


⁠Ukraine ​has notified Romania ​that the maritime drone which exploded ​in ‌the ⁠Black Sea port of ‌Constanta on Friday was ⁠part of group of ​five, Constanta county ‌prefect Adrian Teodor Picoiu was ‌quoted saying by ​news website www.g4media.ro.






05/06/2026 - 12:11
Macron says Zelensky's letter to Putin a 'good initiative'


French President Emmanuel Macron has welcomed Zelensky's appeal for direct talks with Putin, saying it was "time" to resume dialogue with Moscow.
"I believe that it is now up to Ukraine and Russia to establish both a ceasefire and a peace plan. It is the Europeans who can help with this," Macron said at a summit of EU and Balkan leaders in Montenegro. 






05/06/2026 - 11:59
Five Azerbaijanis killed in Azov Sea drone attack, Baku says


Five Azerbaijanis were killed and three wounded in a drone attack on two foreign cargo ships in the Sea of Azov, Azerbaijan's foreign ministry has said.
Citing an official Russian communication to Baku, the ministry said 25 Azerbaijani citizens were among the crews of the two vessels, which it said were not owned by Azerbaijan.
Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Mikhail Galuzin blamed Ukraine for the attack, in comments quoted by Russian state media.






05/06/2026 - 11:44
Zelensky proposes face-to-face meeting with Putin to end years-long war


Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky proposed a face-to-face meeting with Vladimir Putin in a rare open letter to the Russian leader Thursday, saying he was also ready for a "full ceasefire".
FRANCE 24's International Affairs Editor Rochelle Ferguson-Bouyahi tells us more.






05/06/2026 - 11:42
Ukrainian drones strike five ships in Russian-occupied waters, Ukrainian commander says


Ukrainian ⁠drones struck ​five ships ​in the ports of Mariupol and Berdyansk and ​in ‌coastal ⁠waters of Russian-occupied territories ‌overnight, the Ukrainian drone forces ⁠commander has said.
Robert Brovdi ​said on ‌the Telegram app that the drone ‌forces hit dry cargo ​ships and a tanker that were involved in "stealing" ​Ukrainian grain ​and transferring ​military cargo and fuel, with ​the names of the vessels painted over and ⁠their radars turned off.






05/06/2026 - 11:13
Three more maritime drones found on Romanian coast, news site reports


Three ​more maritime ​drones have been found on the Romanian coast after ​an ‌explosion ⁠in Constanta port, ‌news website Digi24 said , citing unnamed sources.






05/06/2026 - 10:47
Helicopters surveying Romanian coast after drone explosion in port, deputy minister says


Two ​helicopters are surveying ​the Constata port and Black Sea ​coast ‌searching ⁠for more drones after ‌a maritime drone exploded ⁠in the port earlier on Friday, ​Romanian Deputy ‌Interior Minister Raed Arafat said.
"We ‌now know there ​is the risk of self-detonation, we ​have ... evacuated ​in case ​there are more drones," ​Arafat told reporters. "We are not panicking, the measures ⁠are purely preventative.






05/06/2026 - 10:29
Maritime drone explodes in Romanian Black Sea port


⁠A ​maritime drone discovered ​in the Romanian Black Sea civil ​port ‌of ⁠Constanta self-detonated at ‌around 10:30am local ⁠time on Friday without causing any ​casualties, the ‌Romanian defence ministry said.
The ‌maritime drone ​is of the type used in the ​war in ​Ukraine and it ​is not part ​of Romanian army's equipment, it added in ⁠a statement.
Video footage shared online by war monitor Clash Report shows smoke rising after the explosion.






05/06/2026 - 09:19
Russian attack kills four people in Ukraine's Kyiv region, governor says


A Russian drone strike on a food production facility near Ukraine's capital Kyiv killed four people early Friday, the region's governor said.
"The enemy attacked a peaceful civilian food industry enterprise," Kyiv region governor Mykola Kalashnyk said in a post on Telegram. "Unfortunately, the number of people killed as a result of the hostile attack ... has increased to four people."
The aftermath of a dairy plant hit by a Russian drone strike in the Kyiv region on June 5, 2026. © State Emergency Service of Ukraine via Reuters






05/06/2026 - 08:35
Russia interceped 123 Ukrainian drones overnight, defence ministry says


Russia's defence ministry said on Friday morning that it had intercepted and destroyed 123 Ukrainian drones in the preceding night over various regions.






05/06/2026 - 08:34
Deadly Russian strikes hit Ukraine's Zaporizhzhia, Pavlograd


A woman was killed in a drone strike in Ukraine's Zaporizhzhia that wounded 16 others, emergency services said.
Russian drone and artillery attacks also killed a woman in the Pavlograd district in Dnipropetrovsk, regional governor Oleksandr Ganzha said on Telegram on Friday. 
Ukraine's air force said it shot down 198 Russian drones overnight.
Medical workers and volunteers evacuate wounded residents from the site of an apartment building destroyed by a Russian drone strike in Zaporizhzhia © Stringer, Reuters






05/06/2026 - 05:24
Volodymyr Zelensky, in open letter to Putin, proposes face-to-face meeting and 'full ceasefire'






05/06/2026 - 07:30
Ukrainian attacks during Russian Davos an 'embarassment' for Putin


As the war in Ukraine drags the Russian economy into stagnation, President Vladimir Putin will address a flagship investment forum in Saint Petersburg on Friday despite recent Ukrainian drone strikes rocking the city and exposing the gaps in Russian air defences.






05/06/2026 - 06:46
Russian drone strike kills man in Kherson, wounds several


Russian drone strikes killed a man in Ukraine's Kherson city and wounded at least three others, regional authorities said on Friday.
"A 75-year-old man died in Korabelny district as a result of an enemy drone attack," said the head of the Kherson City Military Administration Yaroslav Shanko.
City authorities reported that three people were wounded in various districts as a result of strikes, two of whom were hospitalised.
In Konotop city in northeastern Ukraine, three children were wounded in Russian strikes, Mayor Artem Semenikhin wrote on Telegram.






05/06/2026 - 05:27
Putin says Russia will bolster air defences in response to Ukrainian drone attacks


Russian President Vladimir Putin said Thursday that Russia will strengthen its air defences to counter recent Ukrainian drone attacks, which have reached deep inside his country and cast a cloud over his showcase economic forum in his hometown of St. Petersburg.
Speaking in response to a question from The Associated Press during a meeting with heads of international news agencies, Putin acknowledged the damage from Ukrainian drone attacks.
“To our regret, some of them break through,” Putin said of the drone strikes. “Russia has an air defence system, we need to improve it, strengthen it, and we will do that.”
Putin also said Russia is open for a compromise on Ukraine in line with understandings reached at his summit with US President Donald Trump in Anchorage, Alaska, adding that Ukraine needs to accept them to make a deal to end the conflict, now in its fifth year.






05/06/2026 - 05:25
Putin to address 'Russian Davos' in Saint Petersburg, as threat of Ukrainian drones remains


Russia's Vladimir Putin will address a flagship investment forum in Saint Petersburg on Friday, as the war in Ukraine drags the economy into stagnation and days after brazen Ukrainian drone strikes rocked his home city.
Russia's offensive has led to rising prices, tax hikes, two-decade-high borrowing costs, business shutdowns and labour shortages, putting the economy in its trickiest spot since the start of the war in 2022.
Meanwhile, intensifying Ukrainian attacks on Russia's vital energy infrastructure – oil depots, refineries, exporting hubs – are threatening to dent Moscow's most important income stream.
In a highly symbolic strike, one attack hit a facility in Saint Petersburg as the conference opened on Wednesday, with arriving dignitaries greeted by a plume of back smoke in the background.






05/06/2026 - 05:24
US House of Representatives passes bill to aid Ukraine and impose new sanctions on Russia


The US House of Representatives passed legislation Thursday that would aid Ukraine and sanction key segments of the Russian economy, overriding objections from Republican leaders who warned the bill would undermine negotiations designed to achieve a comparable but stronger result.
The legislation, sponsored by Rep. Gregory Meeks, D-N.Y., seeks to cement US assistance for Ukraine by providing more than $1 billion in security and reconstruction aid. It would make another $8 billion available for Ukraine's defense through loans.
The 226-195 vote is a sign of impatience with President Donald Trump's approach to the war and represents the House's second major foreign policy break with Trump this week. The day before, the House, for the first time, approved a war powers resolution aimed at halting US military action against Iran .