Refugee impacts are driving income and consumption toward Crisis! (IPC Phase 3!) 
Key Messages 
This report provides an update to the February 2026 to September 
2026 Food Security Outlook and March 2026 Key Message Update. 
The analysis is based on information available as of April 26, 2026. 
Current anomalies in food security conditions as of April 2026 
Chad - Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026 
Crisis! (IPC Phase 3!) outcomes are expected in the eastern 
departments with high concentrations of refugees (Ouaddaï, 
Sila, Wadi Fira, Ennedi-Est) through September 2026. 
Refugees depend on markets, but are facing food consumption 
deficits due to limited income-generating activities and atypically 
high prices for imported food commodities. Access to food 
assistance is mitigating these deficits, but a small proportion of 
households, fewer than 15 percent, risk deteriorating into 
Emergency (IPC Phase 4). 
Ongoing Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes in Lac Province (Fouli 
and Kaya) are expected to persist through September. 
Persistent insecurity and continued displacement in Lac are 
limiting access to livelihoods for displaced and poor host 
households. During the peak of the lean season (June-August) in 
North Kanem and North Barh El-Gazel (BEG), food access for 
poor households is expected to deteriorate, resulting in 
Crisis (IPC Phase 3). Households will face the combined effects 
of increased market dependence, sustained food price increases, 
and seasonal declines in income. 
In most provinces of the central and Sudanian zones, poor 
households are expected to remain Stressed (IPC Phase 2) 
through September 2026. Food stocks are being depleted 
rapidly, and incomes are insufficient to cover essential non-food 
needs. However, households will maintain minimally adequate 
food consumption through in-kind payments from agricultural 
labor. 
The government estimates that the conflict in the Middle East 
poses limited risks to food supply in Chad. However, the oil 
price shock, in a context where fuel prices are already high 
(2,000 FCFA per liter of gasoline in some eastern localities), could 
affect transport costs, imports, and household purchasing 
power. It is expected to worsen food access difficulties for poor 
households whose incomes will decline during the lean season. 
The massive influx of Sudanese refugees remains the main driver of food insecurity in Chad. Refugees 
are arriving without any means of livelihood. According to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 
FEWS NET is a United States Government-funded activity. The content of this report does not
necessarily reflect the view of the United States Government.
FEWS NET Chad
chad@fews.net
fews.net/west-africa/chad
as of April 27, 2026, around 926,421 new refugees had arrived in the eastern provinces since April 2023, 
particularly in Ennedi-Est, Ouaddaï, Sila, and Wadi Fira. The refugee presence is creating strong competition for 
employment, thereby worsening access to income and food for poor host households. As a result, food demand 
and market prices are also increasing, heightening dependence on food assistance, especially among newly 
arrived refugees. 
The persistence of various conflicts is of concern for worsening food insecurity in Chad. According to 
ACLED, 20 conflict events occurred in Chad between March 13 and April 10, 2026. These incidents caused 26 
deaths and destroyed the livelihoods of 117,188 people. Recurring violence additionally affected 1,191 people, 
forcing displacement and causing movement restrictions in Lac Province. These conditions limit access to 
agricultural activities, fishing, and trade, while placing growing pressure on the livelihoods and resources of host 
communities. A drone attack on March 18 and an armed clash on March 22 between Chadian military forces 
and Sudan’s Rapid Support Forces took place in Ouaddaï Province. This development further restricts cross-
border flows and worsens already fragile food conditions in the eastern provinces. 
Cereal production increased by 12 percent compared to 2024 and by 11.2 percent compared to the five-
year average. According to data revised in March 2026 by the Directorate of Agricultural Production and 
Statistics, cereal production for the 2025/2026 season is estimated at 3,035,565 metric tons, compared with 
2,709,516 metric tons in 2024/25. However, millet and sorghum production, the main staple cereals, 
declined by 3 percent and 17 percent, respectively, compared to the average. The cereal balance sheet 
highlights gross deficits in wheat (99 percent of needs) and local cereals (10 percent of needs), which will have to 
be covered through imports. However, given the closure of the border with Sudan, persistent insecurity in Lac 
Province, and insecurity along the border with the Central African Republic, the local cereal deficit will be 
difficult to offset through imports. 
Local production and commercial stocks are ensuring a satisfactory cereal supply, but food prices are rising 
seasonally compared to the five-year average, except for millet, whose price is 16 percent below average. 
However, the supply of imported food products has declined while their prices have risen sharply. 
Insecurity, the closure of certain borders, and higher transport costs linked to elevated fuel prices have resulted 
in increases of 61 percent for imported rice and 74 percent for wheat flour compared to the average. In the 
eastern provinces, where refugee inflows and the closure of the Sudanese border are generating increased 
demand due to rapid stock depletion, price increases have been particularly severe, exceeding 100 percent. 
Livestock markets are also experiencing strong demand driven by Cameroonian and Nigerian traders and the 
resumption of exports to Libya. Prices remain above the five-year average, and livestock-to-cereal terms of 
trade continue to favor pastoralists. 
Poor household incomes, mainly derived from the sale of local cereals, are atypically below average due 
to reduced millet and sorghum production and exceptionally low prices for millet and bérébéré (dry-
season sorghum). To cope with school expenses and debt repayment, households increased millet sales, 
despite millet being their main source of food and income. These large-scale sales created an oversupply in the 
market during the harvest period, driving prices down. The exceptionally abundant bérébéré harvest also failed 
to help households rebuild stocks because they were forced to sell large quantities for very little income. In Am 
Timan, in Salamat Province, an important bérébéré production zone, local markets became saturated, causing 
prices to collapse. The price of a 100 kilogram bag of berbere, which sold for as much as 35,000 FCFA in 2025, 
dropped to between 4,000 and 6,000 FCFA in March 2026. 
The conflict in the Middle East presents limited risks of food shortages in Chad, according to the 
government and the National Council of Chadian Importers, Investors, Industrialists, and Exporters (CONITE), 
because the country has diversified sources of supply. In the immediate term, the impact is reflected in reduced 
remittances from Chadians working in the Gulf. However, the country continues to face already high fuel prices 
(2,000 FCFA, or about 3.40 USD, per liter of gasoline in some eastern localities), which chronically affect 
transport costs, imports, and household purchasing power. 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 2
Humanitarian food assistance 
Updates to key assumptions about atypical food security conditions through September 2026 
Most of the assumptions that underpinned FEWS NET’s analysis of 
the most likely scenario for the Chad February 2026 to September 
2026 Food Security Outlook remain valid; however, 
the following updates have been made to incorporate new 
evidence: 
Humanitarian food assistance 
The food security component of the assistance plan was funded at only 4.4 percent in April. It is part of a 
broader humanitarian assistance plan developed in February by the government and its partners. The plan aims 
to provide humanitarian assistance to 3.4 million people at a total cost of 984.2 million USD, but it was only 22.5 
percent funded as of April 17, 2026. On April 11, 2026, a joint report by UNHCR and WFP warned about 
insufficient funding for refugees. The negative effects are already visible in refugee camps in eastern Chad, 
where food rations were cut by half during the first quarter. 
Figure 1 
Rainfall anomaly, March 20-April 20, 
2026 
Source: USGS 
The influx of Sudanese refugees and Chadian returnees 
into the eastern provinces is expected to continue 
throughout the projection period. Despite a recent relative 
decline in monthly refugee inflows, the security situation in 
Sudan’s Darfur and Kordofan regions remains volatile. Clashes 
between the Rapid Support Forces and the Sudanese army are 
expected to continue near El-Geneina and Adré (Darfur), with 
sporadic spillovers into Chadian territory. 
Although average to above-average rainfall is still 
expected across all agropastoral zones of Chad, there is a 
high risk of flooding, particularly in the Sudanian zone, 
between July and September 2026. 
With the rains already beginning in the Sudanian zone and the 
southern Sahel (Figure 1), transhumance toward pastoral 
areas is expected to accelerate to avoid an atypical 
resurgence of farmer-herder conflicts. Localized increases in 
conflict are possible along transhumance corridors 
between April and May. A relative calm is expected from June 
onward, with the completion of transhumance movements toward northern pastoral areas. 
The national pasture balance sheet, published in March 2026, remains in surplus through the end of April 
(259 percent of needs), before declining between May and June (109 percent of needs), though still showing 
significant localized deficits in Lac, Kanem, BEG, Batha, Wadi Fira, and Ennedi-Est. 
The global oil shock could increase the cost of agricultural inputs, transport, and imports, heightening 
risks to food security. Accelerated price inflation is anticipated, driven by above-average seasonal increases in 
imported goods, particularly in urban centers and high-demand areas of the eastern provinces. In addition, 
rising energy prices in Gulf countries, which play a key role in nitrogen fertilizer production, are expected to 
trigger sharp increases in fertilizer prices and reduce fertilizer availability. 
The national response plan for households facing food insecurity during the 2026 lean season includes cash 
transfers totaling 53.6 billion FCFA for 1,005,773 people. It also provides humanitarian food assistance in kind 
valued at 67.9 billion FCFA for 1,376,189 people. However, the population targeted by this assistance consists 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 3
Projected acute food insecurity outcomes through September 2026 
Crisis! (IPC Phase 3!) outcomes are expected through September 2026 in departments with high 
concentrations of refugees: Assoungha (Ouaddaï), Kimiti (Sila), Wadi Hawar (Ennedi-Est), Dar-Tama, and Kobé 
(Wadi Fira). These provinces continue to experience an influx of refugees and returnees from Sudan, along with 
atypically high prices for imported food products. Host households are experiencing deteriorating food access due to 
the combined effects of early depletion of food stocks, strong market dependence, persistently high food prices, and 
declining income-earning opportunities. The massive influx of refugees is placing increasing pressure on local 
resources and further weakening the coping capacities of poor host households. Refugees, who are arriving without 
livelihoods, are facing severe food consumption deficits and depend heavily on food assistance, which is preventing 
Emergency (IPC Phase 4) outcomes. Due to insufficient income, a growing proportion of households will increasingly 
resort to begging to survive. A share of these households, estimated at less than 15 percent of the population, is 
vulnerable to deteriorating into Emergency (IPC Phase 4). 
Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes are also expected through September 2026 in the remaining departments of 
Ouaddaï, Sila, Wadi Fira, and Ennedi-Est provinces, where the refugee presence is more limited. Poor households 
will depend exclusively on markets in a context of high prices. Seasonal declines in income and reduced borrowing 
opportunities will further constrain food access. Poor households will reduce the number of meals consumed and 
face food consumption deficits. At the peak of the lean season (between July and August), a small proportion of these 
households (around 5 percent) may resort to extreme coping strategies, particularly begging, and deteriorate into 
Emergency (IPC Phase 4). 
Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes are anticipated through September in Fouli and Kaya departments, affected by 
conflict in Lac Province. The deterioration of livelihoods, slowdown in markets, and near halt of cross-border trade 
will reduce incomes for host households and internally displaced persons (IDPs). This decline limits the amount of 
food accessible on markets and increases reliance on negative coping strategies, including consumption of cheaper 
foods, reducing meals, and borrowing food. 
Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes are also expected between June and September 2026 in North Kanem and North 
BEG. Seasonal increases in food prices, amplified by rising transport costs and deteriorating roads, will coincide with 
declining incomes linked to lower livestock prices and reduced sales of gathered products. Poor households are 
therefore likely to experience food consumption deficits. 
Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes are expected to persist through September 2026 in the northern provinces 
(Borkou, Ennedi-Ouest, and Tibesti). Poor households in these provinces are expected to maintain minimally 
adequate food consumption throughout the projection period due to income from cross-border trade, despite their 
market dependence and anticipated increases in imported food prices. 
In the central and Sudanian zones, poor households in Salamat, Moyen-Chari, Tandjilé, and Guéra are 
expected to experience Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes beginning in April 2026. Residual stocks from bérébéré 
production and limited income from fruit sales will allow households to meet minimum food, but not non-food, 
needs. 
From June through September, Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes are expected to expand across most 
departments in the central and Sudanian zones. Poor households will face widespread depletion of food stocks, 
rising prices, and sharply reduced purchasing power due to weak income from agricultural labor and limited 
borrowing opportunities. Households will be able to maintain limited food consumption due to in-kind payments, but 
will have no remaining income to cover essential non-food needs. 
only of host households in need during the lean season. For Sudanese refugees, the WFP plans to resume 
monthly food assistance distributions through July/August. 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 4
Annex 1: Updates to key sources of evidence used in this analysis 
Many of the key sources of evidence utilized for FEWS NET’s February 2026 to September 2026 Food Security 
Outlook remain the same; however, new and additional sources of evidence are listed below. 
Weather 
monitoring 
and 
forecasting 
FEWS NET/USGS,NOAA, 
FEWS NET Agroclimatology 
Team 
Quantitative Rainfall data and anomalies for March-April 2026, 
seasonal forecasts, and assumptions for the 
2026/27 season 
Displaced 
populations 
IOM, OCHA, UNHCR, Chad 
government; Partner reports 
Quantitative Trends in the movements of refugee populations, 
internally displaced persons (IDPs), Chadian 
returnees from the Central African Republic at 
risk of statelessness, Chadian returnees from the 
Lake Chad Basin, asylum seekers, and funding 
for assistance plans 
Agricultural 
production 
(cereals and 
other cash 
crops) 
Final results of the agricultural 
survey from the Ministry of 
Agricultural Production and 
Industrialization, Central 
Directorate of Statistics, and 
SISAAP regional focal points 
Quantitative Impact of agricultural production on the 
availability of local food commodities (at both 
household and market levels) and employment 
opportunities in the agricultural sector 
Prices of 
agricultural 
and 
livestock 
products 
Reports from partners and 
SISAAP regional focal points 
Quantitative Trends and impacts of staple food prices on 
household purchasing power 
Monthly 
monitoring 
of the food 
and 
nutrition 
situation in 
the 
provinces 
Monthly price bulletins from 
the Agricultural Market 
Information System (SIMPA) 
Quantitative Data on the agricultural and pastoral situation, 
markets, livestock movements, diseases, and 
their impact on food security and nutrition 
SISAAP lean 
season 
response 
plan 
Livestock Market Information 
System (SIM Livestock) of the 
Ministry of Livestock and 
Animal Production of Chad 
Quantitative Assistance program, June-August 2026 
Evidence  Source 
Data 
format Food security element of analysis 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 5
Annex 2: Seasonal calendar 
Annex 3: Projected acute food insecurity outcomes and areas receiving significant levels of humanitarian 
assistance 
Source: FEWS NET 
Each of these maps adheres to IPC v3.1 humanitarian assistance mapping protocols and flags where significant 
levels of humanitarian assistance are being/are expected to be provided.  indicates that at least 25 percent of 
households receive on average 25-50 percent of caloric needs from humanitarian food assistance (HFA). 
indicates that at least 25 percent of households receive on average over 50 percent of caloric needs through 
HFA. This mapping protocol differs from the (!) protocol used in the maps at the top of the report. The use of (!) 
indicates areas that would likely be at least one phase worse in the absence of current or programmed 
humanitarian assistance. 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 6
Recommended citation: FEWS NET. Chad Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026: Refugee impacts are driving 
income and consumption toward Crisis! (IPC Phase 3!), 2026. 
Food Security Outlook Update 
This Food Security Outlook Update provides an analysis of current acute food insecurity conditions and any changes to FEWS NET's latest projection of acute food insecurity outcomes 
in the specified geography over the next six months. Learn more here. 
* FEWS NET classification is IPC-compatible with limited exceptions. IPC-compatible analysis follows key IPC protocols but does not necessarily reflect the consensus of national food security 
partners. As of IPC 3.0, the IPC no longer assesses the impact of food assistance on classification and thus no longer maps the (!). However, FEWS NET continues to produce food security 
maps inclusive of the (!) as well as maps compatible with IPC 3.0/3.1, which include the mapping of food security assistance bags. In rare cases, FEWS NET classification is IPC-aligned but 
not IPC-compatible. IPC-aligned analysis is evidence-based but some types of evidence required for IPC-compatibility were not available. 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 7