For the regional Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) states — 
Bahrain
, 
Kuwait
, 
Oman
, 
Qatar
, 
Saudi Arabia
 and the 
United Arab Emirates
 (UAE) — the consequences of the US-Israeli conflict with Iran extend far beyond immediate military threat.


Since February 28, when the US and Israel launched joint strikes on Iran, and despite a nominal ceasefire, the GCC countries, have been performing a difficult 
balancing act
. Key infrastructure in the region is being targeted by thousands of ballistic missiles and drones while 
the blockade
 of the Strait of Hormuz by — imposed by both Iran and the US — has had a major impact on trade and economic stability. At the same time, Gulf governments have been trying to avoid being 
drawn deeper
 into the conflict. 


'Sea change in perception of security and politics'


In recent years, the Gulf states, and particularly Saudi Arabia, have implemented ambitious economic reforms aimed at diversifying their economies and reducing dependence on oil revenues. Increasingly, these overhauls have shaped 
foreign policy too
, as tourism, 
aviation
, logistics, and 
artificial intelligence
 have become core pillars of 
national development strategies
 .


But a new era is underway, according to Cinzia Bianco, a Gulf analyst at the European Council on Foreign Relations who recently returned from the UAE. "The 
Iran war
 has prompted a sea change in their perception of security and politics," she told DW.
The UAE left the OPEC group on May 1, 2026, and benefits from higher prices per barrel
Image: Addictive Stock/IMAGO


Meanwhile, uncertainty has rattled the tourism sector. 


In March, Dubai International Airport was struck by drones launched by Iran and more than 30,000 flights to and from the Middle East were cancelled. Several airlines are still operating reduced schedules. Also jet fuel prices have almost doubled year-on-year due to the blockage of the 
Strait of Hormuz. 


"The Gulf's image as a 
safe haven
 has certainly been shattered in the short to medium term," said Pauline Raabe, a Gulf observer at the Berlin-based Middle East Minds think tank.


"Potential tourists have been reminded of where the country is located, namely, in the midst of a 
geopolitically tense region,
" she said. 
"They will now think twice or even three times before deciding whether to go to the Emirates."


Financial analysis firm Moody's recently forecast that hotel occupancy in Dubai would plummet from 80% to 10% in the second quarter of 2026.


In April, the World Bank cut its economic growth forecast for the GCC from 4.4% to 1.3%.
Aviation and tourism has plummeted across the Gulf states as a result of the war
Image: AFP


Impact on energy infrastructure


Apart from airports, Iran has also targeted hotels and US military bases in Gulf countries, as well as taking aim at local energy infrastructure. QatarEnergy, Qatar's state-owned energy company, said it would take up to five years to repair the Ras Laffan industrial hub after it was struck by an Iranian ballistic missile in March.


QatarEnergy's chief executive, Saad Al Kaabi, 
told
 British broadcaster BBC
 
that the scale of the damage had "set the region back by 10 to 20 years."


Iran and the US, meanwhile, continue to use their blockades of the Strait of Hormuz as a 
"pressure card"
 for peace negotiations.


Meanwhile, oil and gas exports from Bahrain, Kuwait and Qatar remain disrupted. Moody's recently downgraded Bahrain's outlook from "stable" to "negative."


However, for Oman, Saudi Arabia and the UAE the economic outlook is somewhat different, as they have access to bypass infrastructure: Saudi Arabia has diverted some of its output to its east-west pipeline to the Red Sea, and the UAE uses a 
local onshore pipeline
 from Habshan to Fujairah for exports.


According to Saudi Arabia's state oil company, Saudi Aramco, the first quarter of 2026 saw a 26% jump in profits. As the 
UAE left
 the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and the wider OPEC+ alliance on May 1, 2026, it 
can now decide independently
 from the quota system that limits how much oil each member can produce. 


How will recovery take shape


Analysts predict that even after the current war and the reopening of the Strait of Hormuz — a key waterway for the transport of one-fifth of global oil supplies — higher risk premiums will continue to drive up prices in the Gulf region.


Raabe believes that the financial sector will be among the 
first to recover
. "I assume that once the war is over, or at the very least, once the immediate fighting has ceased for the long term, this established infrastructure will rebound more quickly," she told DW. 
Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman and the UAE's President Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan increasingly disagree on the political courses of their countries
Image: Balkis Press/ABACA/picture alliance


But the Gulf states have realized that they will have to take responsibility for their own security and 
regional stability
 in future, she added.


"A number of assumptions have been questioned, including, for example, that you can give economic stakes to the Iranian regime to guarantee your security," said Bianco. In her view, this is no longer considered a reasonable idea, and nor is the assumption that the Gulf states can rely exclusively on the US for their security.


As a result, new 
defense pacts
 are underway: In May, the UAE signed a deal with 
France
 and Qatar signed a new Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with 
Canada
. 
 
Israel
reportedly sent its Iron Dome air defense system as well as operating personnel to the UAE for the first time. Both countries normalized relations in 2020, which is widely seen as one of the reasons why the UAE has been a key target of Iran.


So far, the UAE has refrained from completely severing diplomatic ties with Iran. "Instead, they have publicly sought to adopt a rhetoric of de-escalation and regional coexistence," Raabe noted.


For Mona Yacoubian, director and senior adviser of the Middle East Program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) in Washington, and Will Todman, senior fellow in the Middle East Program at CSIS, all of this is part of a "new normal" in which the Gulf will need to manage Iran. "Iran is here to stay," the authors recently wrote in an 
analysis
 of the think tank's website.


Cinzia Bianco echoed this view. "The Gulf states are seriously entertaining the idea that the risk of instability will become a constant in their security and political life," she said, predicting an even more authoritarian approach.


Crackdown on free speech


Human rights watchdog Amnesty International  
reported
 earlier this week that more than 1,000 people have been arrested in a "sweeping war-related crackdown on expression including for 
sharing online content
 or expressing views related to the US-Israeli war with Iran and Iran's attacks on the Gulf."


Heba Morayef, Amnesty International's regional director for the Middle East and North Africa warned that "while Gulf states may take measures to address misinformation and protect national security, and may derogate from certain rights during armed conflict, any restriction on freedom of expression must meet strict international human rights standards."


In her view, this current crackdown "goes far beyond what is permitted under international law."


For the Gulf observers Frederic Wehrey and Charles H. Johnson of The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace think tank, these developments hardly fuel hope for the future. "Regardless of the pretext, the crackdowns should be seen less as a show of strength than as a symptom of weakness," the authors 
wrote
, warning that "the danger is that this suppression, occasioned by the pressures of an active war, could outlast the conflict itself, worsening already dismal track records on freedom of expression."
Can Gulf nations close the gap between Iran and the US?
To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that 
supports HTML5 video


Edited by: Jess Smee