1 No.115 – April 2024  GEOGLAM Crop Monitor 
 
Overview:  
At the end of June , overall conditions are positive for wheat, 
maize, rice, and soybeans. For wheat, spring wheat is wrapping 
up in the Northern Hemisphere as winter wheat harvest is 
progressing. In the Southern Hemisphere, sowing is continuing, 
albeit with reduced total sown areas expected . For maize, the 
harvest is proceeding  in the Southern Hemisphere as dry 
condition develop in parts of the Northern Hemisphere. Rice 
conditions are generally favourable; however, areas of concern 
are being watched in India and Thailand. For soybeans, sowing 
is wrapping up in the Northern Hemisphere. 
The Crop Monitor is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global initiative.  
 
                    
                
Contents:  
Crop Conditions & Forecasts at a Glance …………..…… ….….…... 2  
Wheat Conditions………………………….….…………. …….………….…….. 3 
Maize Conditions………………………………………………………….………. 4  
Rice Conditions……………………………………………………………………... 5 
Soybean Conditions………………… ..……………………………….…..…….. 6 
Climate Forecasts……………………………… .……….…………………….….. 7 
Appendix I –Terminology & Definitions…………………….……….. 13 
Appendix II – Crop Season Specific Maps…….……..………………. 15 
Assessment based on information as of June 28th, 2026 
  
 
     
www.cropmonitor.org No. 140 – July 2026
2 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Conditions at a Glance (as of June 28th, 2026) 
Global crop condition map synthesizing  information for all four AMIS crops as of June  28th, 2026. Crop conditions over the main growing areas for 
wheat, maize, rice, and soybean are based on a combination of national and regional crop analyst inputs and  earth observation data. Crops under 
non-favourable conditions are displayed on the map using their crop symbols. 
Crop Conditions at a Glance 
Wheat – In the Northern Hemisphere, winter wheat 
harvesting is continuing. In the Southern Hemisphere, 
sowing is wrapping up under favourable conditions. 
Maize – Harvesting is progressing in the Southern 
Hemisphere as dryness develops in parts of the Northern 
Hemisphere. 
Rice – Conditions are generally favourable; however, a dry 
start to the Kharif season in India and the wet -season in 
Thailand are of concern. 
Soybeans – In the Northern Hemisphere, sowing is 
progressing under generally favourable conditions. 
 
Forecasts at a Glance 
Climate Influences – El Niño conditions are present. This 
will likely be a high-impact event due to its early onset in 
June 2026 and strong or very strong conditions from 
September through November 2026 (84% chance). For 
further details, see page 7. 
Europe – As of early June, drought alerts were present 
across parts of central and eastern Europe, while drought 
warnings and watches were present across most 
countries. The July outlook shows likely above -average 
temperatures across the continent along with possible 
below-average precipitation over central Europe . For 
further details, see page 10. 
 
India – The July forecasts indicate likely below-average 
precipitation across most of the country alongside likely 
above-average maximum and minimum temperatures . 
For further details, see page 11. 
United States – The July precipitation forecast indicates 
likely above -average precipitation over northern New 
England, the central Rockies, the Great Basin, and the 
Southwest, while below- average precipitation is likely 
over southern Texas, western Washington, coastal 
Oregon, North Dakota, and the northern Corn Belt . For 
further details, see page 12. 
 
While the Crop Monitor for AMIS is primarily focused on documenting crop conditions based on environmental factors, conflict and socio-economic factors 
are very likely to negatively impact yields and the ability to cultivate or harvest crops.
3 No.140 – July 2026  GEOGLAM Crop Monitor 
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Wheat Conditions for AMIS Countries 
 
Wheat crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop condition 
information is based on information as of June 28th, 2026. Where crops are in conditions other than favourable, the climatic drivers responsible for 
those conditions are displayed. Crop Season Specific Maps can be found in Appendix 2. 
 
Wheat: In the EU, winter wheat is under generally 
favourable conditions; however, dry soils in central 
Europe and heatwaves in western Europe might 
potentially reduce yield prospects. In Türkiye, winter 
wheat harvesting is ongoing with above- average 
yields. In Ukraine , winter wheat remains under 
favourable conditions away from the war front. In the 
Russian Federation, winter wheat is under favourable 
conditions. Spring wheat sowing has been completed 
with a reduction in total sown area compared to last 
year. In Kazakhstan, conditions are favourable for 
spring and winter wheat. In China , winter wheat 
harvest is wrapping up as spring wheat continues to 
develop. In the US, winter wheat harvest is 
progressing with below -average yields due to 
drought in the central and southern Plains. Spring 
wheat conditions are favourable. In Canada, conditions are favourable as spring wheat sowing wraps up and 
winter wheat develops. In Australia, sowing is wrapping up under mostly favourable conditions, and a noticeable 
decline in total sown area is expected compared to last year. In Argentina, sowing is progressing at a good pace, 
albeit with some delays in the southern agricultural belt due to excess soil moisture. 
 
 
For detailed description of the pie chart please see box on page 6.
4 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Maize Conditions for AMIS Countries 
 
Maize crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop condition 
information is based on information as of June 28th, 2026. Where crops are in conditions other than favourable, the climatic drivers responsible for 
those conditions are displayed. Crop Season Specific Maps can be found in Appendix 2. 
 
Maize: In Brazil, the harvest of the spring -planted 
crop (smaller season) is wrapping up as the harvest of 
the summer-planted crop (larger season) begins. In 
Argentina, the harvest of the late- planted crop 
(smaller season) is progressing under favourable 
conditions. In the US, conditions are favourable, with 
good emergence and silking. In Canada , conditions 
are favourable, with good emergence. In Mexico , 
harvest is ongoing for the autumn -winter crop 
(smaller season) while sowing of the spring -summer 
crop (larger season) continues. In China, spring-maize 
(larger season) is under favourable conditions as 
sowing of summer-maize (smaller season) continues. 
In India, sowing of the Kharif crop (larger season) is 
beginning under mixed conditions due to the slow 
progress of the Southwest Monsoon. In Indonesia , 
the harvest of the wet -season crop is wrapping up as sowing of the dry -season crop continues. In the EU , 
conditions have improved in southeastern Europe, while hot spells in western Europe could negatively affect 
yields. In Ukraine, conditions are generally favourable, though soils are dry in the eastern and western regions. 
In the Russian Federation, conditions are favourable. 
 
For detailed description of the pie chart please see box on page 6.
5 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Rice Conditions for AMIS Countries 
 
Rice crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop condition 
information is based on information as of June  28th, 2026. Where crops are in conditions other than favourable, the climatic drivers responsible for 
those conditions are displayed. Crop Season Specific Maps can be found in Appendix 2. 
 
Rice: In China, conditions are favourable for early 
double-crop rice (smallest season) and for single -
season rice (largest season). There is a reduction in 
total sown area for early double- crop rice compared 
to last year. In India, sowing of the Kharif  crop is 
beginning under mixed conditions due to the slow -
moving Southwest Monsoon. In Bangladesh, the Aus 
crop (smallest season) develops as sowing continues 
for the Aman  crop (medium season). In Indonesia , 
harvesting of wet -season rice is finishing as sowing 
continues for  dry-season rice. In Viet Nam , the 
harvest is ongoing for winter -spring rice (dry-season 
rice) in the north, while in the south, summer-autumn 
rice (wet -season rice) is in the sowing and tillering 
stages. In Thailand , sowing of wet -season rice is 
continuing under mixed conditions due to drought 
and reduced fertilizer availability. There is a reduction in total sown area compared to last year due to lower rice 
prices and rising production costs. In the Philippines, wet-season rice is under favourable conditions.  
 
For detailed description of the pie chart please see box on page 6.
6 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Soybean Conditions for AMIS Countries 
 
Soybean crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on  national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on  information as of June 28th, 2026. Where crops are in conditions other than favourable , the climatic drivers 
responsible for those conditions are displayed. Crop Season Specific Maps can be found in Appendix 2. 
 
Soybeans: In the US, conditions are favourable 
with good emergence and blooming. In Canada, 
sowing is wrapping up under favourable conditions 
after an initial slow start. There is an increase in total 
sown area compared to last year. In China , sowing is 
continuing under favorable conditions. In Ukraine , 
conditions are generally favorable, though dry soils 
persist in the eastern and western regions, along with 
the ongoing war. In India , sowing is just beginning 
under mixed conditions due to the slow progress of 
the Southwest Monsoon and dry soils. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pie chart description: Each slice represents a country's share of total AMIS production (5 -year average). Main producing countries (representing 95 
percent of production) are shown individually, with the remaining 5 percent grouped into the “Other AMIS Countries” category.  The proportion within 
each national slice is coloured according to the crop conditions within a specific growing area; grey indicates that the resp ective area is out of season. 
Sections within each slide are weighted by the sub -national production statistics ( 5-year average) of the respective country. The section within each 
national slice also accounts for multiple cropping seasons (i.e., spring and winter wheat). When conditions are other than favourable, icons are added 
that provide information on the key climatic drivers affecting conditions. 
 
 
For detailed description of the pie chart please see box below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Information on crop conditions in non-AMIS 
countries can be found in the GEOGLAM Crop 
Monitor for Early Warning
7 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Climate Influences: El Niño Advisory & Positive IOD Watch 
 
El Niño conditions are present. This will likely be a high -impact event due to its early onset in June 2026 and 
strong or very strong conditions from September through November 2026 (84% chance, according to the June 
2026 NOAA CPC ENSO outlook). The odds of it ranking among the strongest events on record are relatively high, 
with a 63% chance of very strong El Niño conditions from November 2026 through January 2027. The event will 
remain active at least through March 2027. 
 
El Niño events tend to enhance rainfall in Central Asia, southern North America, south- eastern South America, 
southern Europe, eastern and southern East Africa, and southern and eastern China. Drier -than-average 
conditions tend to occur in Central America,  the Caribbean, northern South America, parts of western and 
northern East Africa, the Sahel region, Southern Africa, India, Northern China, the Maritime Continent, and 
Australia. 
 
Location and timing of likely above- and below-average precipitation related to El Niño events. Based upon observed precipitation during 22 El Niño events since 1950, 
wet and dry correspond to a statistically significant increase in the frequency of precipitation in the upper and lower thirds of historical values, respectively. Statistical 
significance at the 95% level is based on the resampling of precipitation during neutral El Niño-Southern Oscillation conditions. Source: FEWS NET & NOAA & CHC 
 
Positive Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) conditions are also forecast, with potential for a strong event during October 
to December 2026. A positive IOD tends to enhance the drying influence of El Niño in Australia and the Maritime 
Continent and substantially increase the chances of a wet and intense East African short-rain season. 
 
Global temperatures for June 2026 were the second warmest on record, according to the Copernicus Climate 
Change Service Climate Bulletin. The likelihood of extreme conditions during the coming year will increase as El 
Niño warms global temperatures. 
 
During late June through early July 2026, abnormally hot temperatures are forecast in agricultural areas of the 
central and southeastern United States, coastal and northeastern Mexico, Central America, the Caribbean, 
northern Colombia, Europe, the Sahel region, East Africa, India,  northern Pakistan, southeastern Afghanistan, 
central Asia, northern China, and Myanmar (Figure 1). East Africa, India, southern Europe, parts of the 
southwestern United States, and Southeast Asia were impacted by heat earlier in June.
8 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
 
Source: UCSB Climate Hazards Center 
El Niño 2026-2027: Anticipated Climate and Agricultural Yield Impacts 
 
The GEOGLAM Crop Monitors published a special report on El Niño 2026 -2027: Anticipated Climate and 
Agricultural Yield Impacts on June 16th, 2026. The full report is available on the GEOGLAM Crop Monitor website. 
The report details the likely global and regional climatic impacts and how crop yields for wheat, maize, rice, and 
soybeans will be affected. Some highlights are listed below. 
● Stronger El Niño events lead to more predictable, 
though usually not more severe, crop yield outcomes. 
 
● At the global scale, past El Niño events tend to decrease 
rice yields the most, with yields being about 1.0 to 1.5% 
below trend, while soybean yields tend to increase the 
most, with yields being about 1.5 to 2.0% above trend. 
 
● Regionally, Central Asia, bimodal East Africa, southern 
South America, and the US are likely to see the most 
positive crop yield impacts, while Southern Africa, 
Central America, India, and Australia are likely to see the 
most negative crop yield impacts.  
CHC AgriHeat Forecast for June 26 to July 10, 2026. Forecast 15-day average maximum temperatures are shown where they will be abnormally hot 
(Tmax > 80th percentile and > 30 C) and in active crop -growing areas. Areas with forecasted below -average rainfall for this period are also 
identified. Based on a 15-day CHIRTS-GEFS forecast from June 26, 2026. From UCSB Climate Hazards Center. Map source: UCSB Climate Hazards 
Center 
Global-scale yield anomalies relative to expected yields during past El Niño 
events. Boxplots show the interquartile range and median of the yield 
anomalies, with the mean denoted by a white square. The size of each point 
corresponds to the strength of El Niño during Oct -Dec of that year. Source 
Data: FAOSTAT data and NOAA CPC Relative Oceanic Niño Index data.
9 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Global Two-week Precipitation Forecast 
The two -week forecast (Figure 1) shows a chance of above- average precipitation over the western US, 
northwestern Mexico, northern French Guiana, Central West Brazil, northeastern Bolivia, northern Chile, central 
Spain, southern Italy, southern Albania, North Macedonia, Greece, southern Bulgaria, northern Norway, northern 
Sweden, northern Finland, the northwestern and eastern Russian Federation, northern Algeria, northeastern 
Morocco, northwestern Uganda, central Tanzania, central and northern Kazakhstan, eastern Kyrgyzstan, central 
India, eastern Mongolia, southern and northeast China, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea , northern 
Japan, western Laos, northeastern Cambodia, and northeastern Viet Nam. 
 
There is also a risk of below -average precipitation over central and western Canada, the central US, southern 
Mexico, Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, western Nicaragua, Cuba, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, western 
Colombia, eastern Venezuela, northern Ec uador, central Peru, northern Brazil, southeastern Bolivia, western 
Paraguay, northern Argentina, southern Chile, Ireland, the United Kingdom, northern France, Belgium, the 
Netherlands, Germany, Denmark, eastern Poland, southern Sweden, Belarus, Ukraine, t he western Russian 
Federation, northern Romania, Slovakia, eastern Hungary, northern Servia, northcentral Türkiye, southern 
Mauritania, Senegal, Mali, northern Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Côte d'Ivoire, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Togo, Benin, Niger, 
Nigeria, Chad, the northern Central  African Republic, Sudan, northern South Sudan, Eritrea, central and northern 
Ethiopia, southern Somalia, southern Tanzania, central Mozambique, eastern Kazakhstan, Pakistan, southern and 
western India, Sri Lanka, northern Bangladesh, Bhutan, central and northwestern China, southern Mongolia, 
southern Japan, southern Myanmar, central Thailand, western Cambodia, the southern Philippines, Malaysia, 
Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, and eastern Australia. 
 
Figure 1: IRI SubX Precipitation Biweekly Probability Forecast for 4 – 17 July 2026, issued on 26 June 2026. The forecast is based on statistically 
calibrated tercile category forecasts from three SubX models. Source: IRI Subseasonal Forecasts Maproom
10 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Europe Outlook 
In Europe, drought alerts as of early June exist over parts of the southern United Kingdom, south-western Spain, 
central-western France, southern Germany, Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, southern Estonia, Belarus, central and 
western Ukraine, Slovakia, Hungary,  western Czechia, eastern Austria, western Romania, western and northern 
Italy, and North Macedonia. Additionally, drought warnings and watch conditions cover parts of most countries. 
The July 2026 outlook indicates likely above-average precipitation over parts of southeastern Spain, southwestern 
Greece, and southern Türkiye , while below -average precipitation is likely over Ireland, the United Kingdom, 
Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany, Denmark, southern Norway, southern Sweden, Poland, Lithuania, Czechia, 
Austria, Slovakia, Hungary, western Belarus, western Ukraine, northern Macedonia, northern Romania, Serbia, 
eastern Slovenia, Croatia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina . During this time, temperatures are highly likely to be 
above-average across all of Europe, with the highest likelihood over southern Europe, central Europe, and the 
Balkans. 
 
Top: 1-10 June 2026 drought conditions over Europe from the European Drought Observatory. Bottom Left: July 2026 precipitation probability 
forecast. Bottom Right: July 2026 temperature probability forecast. Maps from the Copernicus Climate Change Service
11 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
India Outlook 
As of June 24th, drought conditions are present across northern, northeastern, eastern, central, and western parts 
of the country (top). The Southwest Monsoon (bottom left) has had a weak start and has been moving behind 
the normal schedule of advancement. As of July 1st, the Southwest Monsoon has yet to cover the western parts 
of the country. Overall precipitation from the 2026 Southwest Monsoon is forecasted to be below-average (90%) 
from the long-term average.  
 
The July forecast calls for below-average precipitation (<94% of the long-term average) over the country (bottom 
middle). Regionally, only the northwest, northeast, central-east, and eastern peninsular regions are likely to see 
above-average precipitation. During this time, both the maximum (bottom right) and minimum temperatures are 
likely to be above-average across most of the country, except for isolated pockets. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Top: Combined Drought Index (CDI) for the week ending June 25, 2026, from the India Drought Monitor . Bottom Left: Advancement of the 2026 
Southwest Monsoon as of July 1, 2026. Bottom Middle: Probable precipitation forecast for July 2026. Bottom Right: Probable maximum temperature 
forecast for July 2026. Source: India Meteorological Department
12 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
United States Outlook 
The July 2026 precipitation forecast indicates likely above- average precipitation over parts of  northern New 
England, the central Rockies, the Great Basin, and the Southwest, while below-average precipitation is likely over 
southern Texas, western Washington, coastal Oregon, North Dakota, Minnesota, northern Wisconsin, and 
northern Michigan. At the same time, temperatures are likely to be above average across most of the country 
except over the Corn Belt and the Northern Plains, where chances are equal for above-  or below -average 
temperatures. 
 
The impacts of July’s weather outlook are the likely development or expansion of drought conditions over parts 
of the Pacific Northwest, northern California, western Kansas, and eastern Texas . At the same time, drought 
conditions are likely to improve or be removed over parts of the northern Corn Belt, the Southwest, the Southeast, 
and coastal New England.  
 
July 2026 Outlook 
 
 
 
 
Upper Left: July 2026 precipitation outlook issued on 30 June 2026. Upper Right: July 2026 temperature outlook issued on 30 June 2026. Bottom: July 
2026 drought outlook released on 30 June 2026. Maps from NOAA CPC  and NOAA/National Weather Service, National Centers for Environmental 
Prediction, and Climate Prediction Center.
13 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Appendix 1: Terminology & Definitions 
 
Crop Conditions: 
Exceptional: Conditions are much better than average* at the time of reporting. This label is only used during 
the grain-filling through the harvest stages. 
Favourable: Conditions range from slightly lower to slightly better than average* at reporting time.  
Watch: Conditions are close to average* but there is a potential risk to final production. The crop can still 
recover to average or near average conditions if the ground situation improves. This label is only used during 
the planting-early vegetative, and vegetative-reproductive stages. 
Poor: Crop conditions are well below average*. Crop yields are likely to be more than 5% below average. This 
is only used when conditions are not likely to be able to recover, and an impact on production is likely.  
Out of Season: Crops are not currently planted or in development during this time. 
No Data: No reliable source of data is available at this time. 
*” Average” refers to the average conditions over the past 5 years. 
 
 
Drivers: 
These represent the key climatic, environmental, and anthropomorphic drivers that are having an impact on crop 
condition status. They result in production impacts and can act as either positive or negative drivers of crop 
conditions. 
Wet: Wetter than average (includes waterlogging and floods). 
Dry: Drier than average. 
Hot: Hotter than average. 
Cold: Cooler than average or risk of frost damage. 
Extreme Events: A catch-all for all other climate risks (i.e., hurricane, typhoon, frost, hail, winter kill, wind damage, 
etc.). When this category is used, the analyst will also specify the type of extreme event in the text. 
Delayed-Onset: Late start of the season. 
Pest & Disease: Destructive insects, birds, animals, or plant disease. 
Socio-economic: Social or economic factors that impact crop conditions (i.e., policy changes, agricultural subsidies, 
government intervention, agricultural inputs, etc.) 
Conflict: Armed conflict or civil unrest that is preventing the planting, working, or harvesting of the fields by the 
farmers.
14 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Crop Season Nomenclature: 
In countries that contain multiple cropping seasons for the same crop, the following chart identifies the national season nam e 
associated with each crop season within the Crop Monitor.  Within the Crop Monitor for AMIS countries, the larger producing s eason 
(based upon the most recent 5 years of statistics) has been assigned to the first season.
15 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
Appendix 2: Crop Season-Specific Maps 
 
 
Winter wheat crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on information as of June 28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions, the climatic drivers responsible 
for those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of the life cycle the crops 
are currently in for each area. 
 
 
Spring wheat crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on  national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on information as of June 28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions, the climatic drivers responsible 
for those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of the life cycle the crops 
are currently in for each area.
16 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
 
Maize 1 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on  national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on information as of June 28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions, the climatic drivers responsible 
for those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of the life cycle the crops 
are currently in for each area. 
 
 
Maize 2 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on  national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on information as of June 28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions, the climatic drivers responsible 
for those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of the life cycle the crops 
are currently in for each area.
17 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
 
Rice 1 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop condition 
information is based on information as of June  28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions , the climatic drivers responsible for 
those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of  the life cycle the crops 
are currently in for each area. 
 
 
 
Rice 2 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop condition 
information is based on information as of June  28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions , the climatic drivers responsible for 
those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of  the life cycle the crops 
are currently in for each area.
18 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
 
Rice 3 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop condition 
information is based on information as of June  28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions , the climatic drivers responsible for 
those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of  the life cycle the crops 
are currently in for each area. 
 
 
Soybean 1 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on  national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on information as of June 28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions, the climatic drivers responsible 
for those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of the life cycle the crops 
are currently in for each area.
19 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
The Crop Monitor for AMIS is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global Initiative. 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
 
Soybean 2 crop conditions over the main growing areas are based on  national and regional crop analyst inputs and earth observation data. Crop 
condition information is based on information as of June 28th, 2026. Where crops are in less than favourable conditions, the climatic drivers responsible 
for those conditions are displayed.  The crop calendar is provided as a point of reference to provide information on what part of the life cycle the crops 
are currently in for each area.
20 | No. 140 – July 2026                                            
 
 
Crop Monitor for AMIS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Crop Monitor is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global initiative.  
Prepared by members of the GEOGLAM Community of Practice  
Coordinated by the University of Maryland with funding from NASA Harvest  
Climatic Influences by Climate Hazards Center of UC Santa Barbara  
 
 
2026 Crop Monitor for AMIS release dates:  
5 June, 5 June, 2 June, 7 June, 4 June, 2 July, 6 August , 3 September , 1 October , 5 November , 3 December  
 
Cover p hoto courtesy of Brian Barker 
 
https://cropmonitor.org/  
@GEOCropMonitor  
 
 
 
 
 
Sources and Disclaimers: The Crop Monitor assessment is conducted by GEOGLAM with inputs from the following partners (in 
alphabetical order): Argentina (Buenos Aires Grains Exchange, MAGyP), Asia Rice Countries (AFSIS, ASEAN+3 & Asia RiCE), 
Australia (ABARES & CSIRO), Brazil (CONAB & INPE), Canada (AAFC), China (CAS), EU (EC JRC MARS), Gro Intelligence, India 
(NCFC), Indonesia (LAPAN & MOA), International (CIMMYT, FAO GIEWS, IFPRI & IRRI), Japan (JAXA, MAFF), Mexico (SIAP), 
Russian Federation (IKI), South Africa (ARC & CSIR & GeoTerraImage & SANSA), Thailand (GISTDA & OAE), Ukraine (NASU-NSAU 
& UHMC), USA (NASA, UMD, USGS – FEWS NET, USDA (FAS, NASS)), Viet Nam (VAST & VIMHE-MARD). The findings and 
conclusions in this joint multiagency report are consensual statements from the GEOGLAM experts, and do not necessarily 
reflect those of the individual agencies represented by these experts. 
More detailed information on the GEOGLAM crop assessments is available at https://cropmonitor.org 
Sources & Disclaimer