1A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
A framework for 
assessing climate change 
and disaster-related 
losses of biodiversity 
and ecosystem services 
May 2026 
United Nations University
Institute for Environment and Human Security
A framework for 
assessing climate change 
and disaster-related 
losses of biodiversity 
and ecosystem services 
May 2026 
Authors 
Yvonne Walz, Lisa Hartmann, Sally Janzen, Chithra Nair Rajendran, Katharina Kalbitz, Susan Mlenga, 
Chawanangwa Nyirenda, Iria Touzon Calle, Le-Anne Roper
Reviewers 
Mozaharul Alam, Abbie Amundsen, Fatemeh Bakhitari, Ida Bjoerk, Nazgul Borkosheva, Michelle 
DeFreese, Cordula Epple, Ansgar Fellendorf, Francesco Gaetani, Natalie Harms, Maarten Hofman, 
Stefan Kienberger, Ra Kim Bo, Anil Kumar, Ning Liu, Neil Aldrin Mallari, Jennica Paula Masigan, Sara 
Matasci, Jutta May, Nadja Muenstermann, Jaroslav Mysiak, Vincent Oeba, Jello D. Ortega, Raquel 
Smith Ortega, Andrea Ortiz Vargas, Urbano Fra Paleo, Avash Pandey, Ekaterina Poleshchuk, Beatriz 
Pozuelo, Teerapong Praphotjanaporn, Fabian Rackelmann, Johannes Reﬁsch, Fabrice Renaud, Mario 
Salgado, Joshitha Sankam, Nagisa Shiiba, Heidi Tuhkanen, Kees Van der Geest, Douwe Van Schie, 
Boris Van Zanten, Ayda Villalobos-Castro, Animesh Kumar, Toshiya Kai, Jessica Troni, Fruzsina 
Straus, Anna Kilponen, Zita Sebesvari
UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
Contents
Abbreviations  4
Glossary  5
Executive summary  8
Guidance for the reader  10
1.  Background and objective 12
2.  Overview of the framework  15
3.  Hazard context 18
4.  Ecosystem and biodiversity context 20
5.  Assessing climate change and disaster-related  
 losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 22
5.1. Reference-level monitoring for the assessment of losses for extreme and  
  sudden-onset events and slow-onset events  22
5.2. Reference-level monitoring for assessing losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services  25
5.3. The assessment of losses 27
5.4. Use cases of the framework 27
6.  Important considerations related to this framework 30
References 32
Imprint  35
3A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
List of ﬁgures
Figure 1: Framework for assessing losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 16
Figure 2: Reference-level monitoring and assessment of losses in the context of  
extreme and sudden-onset events 23
Figure 3: Reference-level monitoring and assessment of losses in the context of  
slow-onset events 24
List of boxes
Box 1: Disaster & Hazardous Events, Losses and Damages Tracking & Analysis  
(DELTA) Resilience  24
Box 2: The System of Environmental-Economic Accounting – Ecosystem Accounting 25
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 4
Abbreviations 
BTR Biennial Transparency Reports
CBD Convention on Biological Diversity
DELTA Resilience Disaster & Hazardous Events, Losses and Damages Tracking & Analysis
DRR Disaster Risk Reduction
EBV  Essential Biodiversity Variables
FLRD Fund for responding to Loss and Damage
FRAME-ECO Framework to assess climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services
GIS Geographical information systems
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
ISC International Science Council
IUCN GET International Union for Conservation of Nature Global Ecosystem Typology
NAP National Adaptation Plan
NbS Nature-based Solutions
NCP Nature’s Contributions to People
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
SEEA EA System of Environmental-Economic Accounting – Ecosystem Accounts
UNDRR United Nations Oﬃce for Disaster Risk Reduction
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
5A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
Glossary
Baseline
A minimum or starting point from which to compare other information (e.g. for comparisons between past and 
present or before and after an intervention) (IPBES, 2025a).
Biodiversity 
The variability among living organisms from all sources – including terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems 
– and the ecological complexes of which they are a part. This includes variation in genetic, phenotypic, phylogenetic 
and functional attributes, as well as changes in abundance and distribution over time and space within and among 
species, biological communities and ecosystems (IPBES, 2025a).
Diverse values of nature 
Nature is valued in diverse ways. These diverse values arise from the diﬀerent lenses through which people 
interpret human–nature relationships (i.e. worldviews). Diverse values are grouped into three broad categories: 
i) intrinsic (nature’s own worth), ii) instrumental (nature’s utility) and iii) relational (relationship of people with 
nature) (IPBES, 2025a).
Hazard 
A process, phenomenon or human activity that may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, property 
damage, social and economic disruption, or environmental degradation (UNDRR, 2017).
Hazardous event 
The manifestation of a hazard in a particular place during a particular period of time (UNDRR, 2017).
Ecosystem
A dynamic complex of plant, animal and microorganism communities and their non-living environment interacting 
as a functional unit (CBD, 2025).
Ecosystem condition
An ecosystem’s structure and functioning understood as the composition of biotic and abiotic elements and the 
ﬂows of energy and materials through them (IPBES, 2025a; Grizetti and others, 2019; UNSD, 2024).
Ecosystem extent
An ecosystem’s size, measured in spatial area and/or length or volume (UNSD, 2024).
Ecosystem services
The multiple beneﬁts that humans derive from nature, encompassing provisioning (e.g. food, water), regulating (e.g. 
climate regulation, ﬂood control), cultural (e.g. spiritual and recreational) and supporting services (e.g. nutrient 
cycling, soil formation) that underpin life on Earth (MEA, 2005a).
Extreme events 
The occurrence of a value of a weather or climate variable above (or below) a threshold value near the upper (or 
lower) ends of the range of observed values of the variable (building on the deﬁnition of “extreme weather or 
climate event” by IPCC, 2012).
Loss and Damage (L&D)
No agreed deﬁnition of the term “Loss and Damage” exists under the Convention, but the Cancun Agreements 
provide boundaries by referencing impacts from extreme weather and slow-onset events (UNFCCC, 2012).
Decision 2/CP.19 on establishing the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with climate 
change impacts acknowledges that “loss and damage associated with the adverse eﬀects of climate change 
includes, and in some cases involves more than, that which can be reduced by adaptation” (UNFCCC, 2013).
Losses and damages 
The adverse eﬀects of climate-related stressors that cannot be or have not been avoided through mitigation or 
managed through adaptation eﬀorts (van der Geest and others, 2019). 
Nature’s Contributions to People
All the contributions, both positive and negative, of living nature (i.e. all organisms, ecosystems and their 
associated ecological and evolutionary processes) to people’s quality of life (IPBES, 2025a).
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 6
Reference level
The value of a variable at the reference condition against which it is meaningful to compare past, present or future 
measured values of the variable (UNSD, 2024).
Risk (disaster risk)
The potential loss of life, injury or destroyed or damaged assets that could occur to a system, society or community 
in a speciﬁc period of time, determined probabilistically as a function of hazard, exposure, vulnerability and 
capacity (UNDRR, 2017).
Slow-onset events
Events that evolve gradually from incremental changes occurring over many years or from an increased frequency 
or intensity of recurring events (UNFCCC, 2012).
Sudden-onset event
A single, discrete event that occurs in a matter of days or even hours (UNFCCC, 2012).
© Boudewijn Huysmans / Unsplash
7A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 8
Executive summary 
This report introduces a framework for assessing 
climate change and disaster-related losses of 
biodiversity and ecosystem services. In response 
to ecosystem degradation, biodiversity declines 
and cascading impacts on human well-being, 
this framework aims to ﬁll data gaps through a 
standardized approach to identifying, monitoring and 
assessing such losses. 
Discussions on loss and damage have been gaining 
traction at multiple levels of governance and society, 
particularly as losses to the environment are often not 
captured comprehensively. While some instrumental 
values of nature, such as the provision of crops, are 
considered in assessments of losses, many of the less 
tangible losses require more attention, particularly 
considering their adverse cascading eﬀects on 
society, including on health, well-being, habitability, 
opportunities, dignity and identity (UNFCCC, 2024). 
The lack of comprehensive documentation of losses 
related to biodiversity and ecosystem services is a 
major barrier to informed planning, prioritization of 
actions and decision-making, such as in the context of 
implementing the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction, the Paris Agreement and the Kunming-
Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework. 
Against this background, this framework aims to: i) 
achieve a better understanding of losses of biodiversity 
and ecosystem services; ii) guide countries through 
comprehensive assessments of losses related to 
ecosystem extent, ecosystem condition, including 
biodiversity, and diverse values of nature and 
ecosystem services using available data, methodologies 
and tools; and iii) support country-level programming 
to avert, minimize and address these losses. 
This framework consists of two main components: 
i) the hazard context and ii) the ecosystem and 
biodiversity context. The hazard context ranges from 
extreme and sudden-onset events, such as storms 
or ﬂoods, to slow-onset events, like sea level rise, 
temperature increases or ocean acidiﬁcation. While 
the primary focus of this report is on events related 
to climate change, it is applicable to non-climate-
related hazards, such as earthquakes, as its general 
components and approaches are universal. The 
ecosystem and biodiversity context encompasses 
three interrelated dimensions: i) ecosystem extent, 
ii) ecosystem condition, including biodiversity, 
and iii) the diverse values of nature and ecosystem 
services. Negative changes in any of these dimensions 
are assumed to indicate potential losses when they 
coincide with hazardous events in space and time. 
Regular monitoring of both components is, therefore, 
essential and serves as the basis for loss assessments 
through the establishment of reference levels.
Reference-level monitoring is a central element of 
this framework, as it enables comparison between the 
state of the ecosystem dimensions before, during and 
after hazardous events. This framework aligns with 
international statistical standards for reference-level 
monitoring, particularly the System of Environmental-
Economic Accounting – Ecosystem Accounting, and 
integrates diverse data sources, including quantitative 
data from remote sensing, in situ measurements 
and qualitative data from participatory methods and 
community-based sources, including indigenous and 
local knowledge.
The framework proposes distinct approaches for 
assessing losses related to extreme and sudden-onset 
events as well as slow-onset events. For extreme 
and sudden-onset events, reference-level data on 
ecosystem and biodiversity dimensions collected 
before the event are compared with post-event data, 
with negative changes indicating losses. Conversely, 
slow-onset events rarely have a clear starting point. 
Assessments, therefore, require comparing reference-
level data collected at multiple time points with the 
most recent data to detect changes. 
Beyond the mere identiﬁcation of loss of biodiversity 
and ecosystem services, this framework informs 
multiple use cases. Regular monitoring supported by 
this framework can inform ecosystem management, 
conservation, restoration, nature-based solutions, and 
exposure and vulnerability assessments. It can also 
contribute to natural capital accounting. 
This framework further provides a basis for supporting 
Parties under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and the Paris 
Agreement, by reporting and explaining loss and 
damage speciﬁc to their contexts. It is also a resource 
for work under the Warsaw International Mechanism 
for Loss and Damage, its Executive Committee and 
the Santiago Network, by strengthening standardized 
assessments of biodiversity and ecosystem 
service losses. 
Countries can further utilize the framework to identify 
gaps relating to biodiversity and ecosystem losses 
and to access ﬁnance to address them, including
9A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
through the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage. 
The framework can also support the development of 
countries’ Biennial Transparency Reports, National 
Adaptation Plans and, potentially, reporting under the 
Global Goal on Adaptation. It aligns with the priorities 
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
by advancing understanding of disaster risk and 
enabling improved reporting on ecosystem-related 
impacts, while complementing disaster tracking 
systems, such as the Disaster & Hazardous Events, 
Losses and Damages Tracking & Analysis (DELTA) 
Resilience system, through structured integration and 
tracking of environmental losses.
It is important to note the limitations of this 
framework as it attempts to simplify a highly complex 
topic. These limitations include the challenge of 
distinguishing between extreme and sudden-onset 
events versus slow-onset events, the identiﬁcation 
of climate change and hazards as primary drivers 
of losses, and the spatial and temporal dynamics of 
ecosystems and related losses. 
This presented framework provides a basis to 
advance the assessment of climate change and 
disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem 
services, particularly in contexts where data on 
such losses are limited. The next critical step is 
to apply the framework across diverse contexts, 
considering data availability, ecosystem types and 
hazardous events. Such applications are essential 
to reﬁne methodologies, identify suitable metrics 
and indicators, capture context-speciﬁc dynamics, 
interpret losses and ensure the framework’s practical 
relevance, robustness and adaptability across 
diverse settings.
© Timo Volz / Unsplash
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 10
Guidance for the reader 
This report contains six chapters. Chapter 1 elaborates 
on the background and objectives of the framework. 
Chapter 2 provides an overview of the framework, 
which is then presented in depth in chapters 3, 
4 and 5. Chapter 6 concludes with important 
considerations related to the framework. 
Policy-relevant information is presented in the 
executive summary, chapter 2, chapter 5.3, 
chapter 5.4 and chapter 6.
There is also an accompanying online resource: 
“Annex A – Data sources collection to support the 
assessment of climate change and disaster-related 
losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services”. This 
compilation serves to inspire everyone who wants to 
apply the framework by demonstrating which kinds of 
data might be useful.
© Oleksandr Sushko / Unsplash
11A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
© Héctor Mavare / Unsplash
11A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 12
1. Background and objective
Climate change is threatening ecosystems in multiple 
ways, causing widespread biodiversity loss and long-
term, potentially irreversible ecosystem shifts (IPCC, 
2023). Climate-related hazards trigger disasters that 
lead to losses in ecosystem services and biodiversity, 
harming human systems (UNFCCC, 2024). Although 
these losses threaten the quality of life for present 
and future generations (IPBES, 2019), they remain 
poorly understood. Gaining a better understanding is 
essential for eﬀective planning and implementation 
of disaster risk reduction (DRR) measures, especially 
to avert, minimize and address losses in biodiversity 
and ecosystem services and their eﬀects on people 
and communities. This understanding must cover risks 
from natural hazards and climate change threats that 
can exacerbate vulnerabilities and harm ecosystems 
and human well-being. 
Despite discussions on loss and damage gaining 
traction at multiple levels of governance and society, 
relevant authorities, researchers and civil society 
still face signiﬁcant challenges. These stem from the 
varied deﬁnitions of “loss” across geographies and the 
inherent complexity of loss-assessment processes, 
particularly those related to environmental typologies, 
such as biodiversity and ecosystem services. The 
lack of a standardized framework for assessing 
and monitoring biodiversity and ecosystem service 
losses related to climate change and disasters limits 
countries’ capacity to respond. 
Historical understandings of losses have focused on 
those that can be easily identiﬁed, quantiﬁed and 
monetized, while our understandings of non-economic 
losses – that is, those that may not constitute direct 
loss of revenue or those that are irreducible to 
economic terms – are nevertheless signiﬁcant and 
deserve greater attention.
The development of a framework to assess such 
diﬀerent losses is a concrete step towards enriching 
the discussion on standards and methodological 
guidance. Therefore, it helps represent and respond 
to climate change and disaster-related losses of 
biodiversity and ecosystem services. It contributes to:
1. Achieving a better understanding and awareness 
of these types of losses. 
2. Guiding countries using available data, 
methodologies and tools to assess climate change 
and disaster-related losses related to ecosystem 
extent and condition (including biodiversity, 
diverse values of nature and ecosystem 
services), while also supporting the generation 
and collection of primary data using accessible 
national and global sources, including remote 
sensing and satellite imagery. 
3. Supporting more eﬀective, responsive, country-
level programming to avert, minimize and address 
climate change and disaster-related losses of 
biodiversity and ecosystem services. 
Through this, the framework deepens understanding 
of biodiversity and ecosystem-services losses, 
contributing to overall risk understanding and, 
therefore, supporting the priorities for action of the 
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, as well 
as relevant elements of the Rio Conventions. In view 
of cascading risks, the framework prioritizes assessing 
the primary impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem 
services, establishing a foundation for understanding 
subsequent consequences for human communities, as 
losses related to biodiversity and ecosystem services 
have direct and indirect impacts on socioecological 
systems, aﬀecting livelihoods, security, health, well-
being, opportunities, dignity and identity (UNFCCC, 2024). 
A better understanding of these losses supports risk-
informed decision-making and policy development, 
contributing to increasing resilience. The knowledge 
generated from the framework can, for example, 
inform restoration initiatives and nature-based 
solutions (NbS) for resilient recovery, promote the 
consideration and integration of diverse values of 
nature in spatial planning, and contribute to global 
discussions on losses and damages. It can also 
directly support countries in articulating evidence-
based needs to access funding, including from the 
Fund for responding to Loss and Damage, and can be 
included in or inform requests for technical assistance 
under the Santiago Network. 
The framework further supports achieving the 
targets of the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity 
Framework – particularly Target 8: to “Minimize the 
Impacts of Climate Change on Biodiversity and Build 
Resilience” – and achieving Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) (particularly SDG 13 – Climate action, 
SDG 14 – Life below water and SDG 15 – Life on land).
To leverage the potential of the framework to 
contribute to these processes, it primarily aims to 
inform the work of policymakers at the national level. 
These include national ministries, such as for the
13A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
environment, National Statistics Oﬃces and Disaster 
Risk Reduction and Management agencies, as well as 
national loss and damage focal points. These actors 
can facilitate the application of the framework and its 
ﬁndings into the development and implementation 
of national strategies and plans, including, but not 
limited to, DRR strategies, National Adaptation Plans 
(NAPs) and Biennial Transparency Reports (BTRs). 
As the governance of loss and damage is country-
speciﬁc, the uptake of the framework should be 
guided by respective national contexts. The described 
user groups and institutional entry points are 
not prescriptive.
© Vincent Burkhead / Unsplash
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 14
© Quang Nguyen Vinh / Unsplash
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 14
15A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
2. Overview of the framework 
The framework to assess climate change and disaster-
related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
(FRAME-ECO) comprises two main components: 
i) the hazard context and ii) the ecosystem and 
biodiversity context. The component hazard context 
speciﬁcally considers a continuum of extreme and 
sudden-onset events and slow-onset events, with 
climate change being a major driver of losses (IPCC, 
2022) (see chapter 3). The component ecosystem and 
biodiversity context consists of three dimensions: 
i) ecosystem extent, ii) ecosystem condition, 
including biodiversity, and iii) diverse values of nature 
and ecosystem services (based on the System of 
Environmental-Economic Accounting – Ecosystem 
Accounting [SEEA EA], UNSD, 2024; IPBES, 2019, see 
chapter 4). Notably, the dimensions of ecosystem 
extent and condition inﬂuence diverse values of 
nature and ecosystem services, particularly with 
regard to regulating services, which help mitigate risks 
and, in turn, inﬂuence the extent of hazard impacts. 
The framework builds on the assumption that 
negative changes in these three dimensions may 
indicate climate or disaster-related losses, especially 
where they spatially and temporally coincide and are 
associated with hazardous events. This operational 
assumption is used as a pragmatic proxy to support 
monitoring where formal attribution analysis is not 
feasible and does not imply direct causal attribution 
between observed changes and speciﬁc hazards 
or climate drivers. Therefore, hazard context and 
ecosystem and biodiversity context are to be regularly 
monitored and overlaid in a spatially and temporally 
explicit manner. How this is done diﬀers from extreme 
and sudden-onset events to slow-onset events and is 
explained in chapter 5.1.
The framework is an outline, designed to be applied at 
diﬀerent scales for loss assessments at local, regional, 
national or international level, depending on the 
scale at which losses are to be observed. Assessment 
at the diﬀerent scales requires use of diﬀerent data 
sources, from local to global data (more information 
on data sources and tools is in the document “Annex A 
– Data sources collection to support the assessment 
of climate change and disaster-related losses of 
biodiversity and ecosystem services”). Figure 1 
illustrates the overall framework and highlights the 
process of assessing losses of biodiversity and 
ecosystem services. Each framework component 
and step of the loss assessment are detailed in the 
following chapters. However, it has to be noted that 
this framework is an approach to inspire loss and 
damage assessment, which in turn is expected to be 
the practical application to be undertaken in diﬀerent 
country contexts.
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 16
Figure 1: Framework for assessing losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services. Arrows indicate use cases, while 
dotted lines show feedback loops. PDNAs = Post-Disaster Needs Assessments. 
Source: Authors.
Updated reference 
levels over time
Hazard context
(Negative) changes in ecosystem and biodiversity context
Slow-onset eventExtreme and sudden-onset event
Loss
assessment
Loss
assessment
Reference-level
monitoring
Intensity of event
Time Time
Intensity of event
T1
T2
T3
Use cases
e.g., NbS planning, conservation 
and restoration planning
Use cases
e.g., ecosystem management, 
exposure and vulnerability assess-
ment, natural capital accounting
Use cases
e.g., Sendai Framework, PDNAs, 
climate risk and DRR /f_inance, FRLD
Extreme and 
sudden-onset events
Slow-onset events
Monitoring the continuum of sudden-onset 
to slow-onset events
Ecosystem and biodiversity context 
Ecosystem extent 
Ecosystem condition, including 
biodiversity 
Diverse values of nature and 
ecosystem services
Regular monitoring
Spatial and 
temporal overlay
Loss assessment
Change detection through comparison of 
ecosystem and biodiversity data collected at 
multiple points in time and most recent data 
(T1 = Reference level 1, T2 = Reference level 2, 
T3 = Reference level 3)
Comparison of ecosystem and 
biodiversity data collected at two 
points in time: pre-event data and most 
recent post-event data
17A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
© Timo Volz / Unsplash
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 18
3. Hazard context
For the loss assessment, it is necessary to understand 
the hazard context that drives losses of biodiversity 
and ecosystem services in a given area. For this 
framework, hazards comprise a continuum of extreme 
and sudden-onset events and slow-onset events. 
The term “extreme events” is mainly used by the 
climate change and loss and damage communities 
(see, for example, UNFCCC, 2025), and builds on the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
deﬁnition of extreme weather or climate events as 
“The occurrence of a value of a weather or climate 
variable above (or below) a threshold value near the 
upper (or lower) ends of the range of observed values 
of the variable” (IPCC, 2012).
Sudden-onset events are deﬁned as “a single, discrete 
event that occurs in a matter of days or even hours” 
(UNFCCC, 2012) and are categorized as per the hazard 
classiﬁcation of the United Nations Oﬃce for Disaster 
Risk Reduction and the International Science Council 
(UNDRR and ISC, 2025). In this current framework, 
primarily extreme and sudden-onset events related 
to climate change are considered (i.e. those events 
increasing in frequency and magnitude due to 
climate change). The primary focus on these events 
stems from the prominent global discussion around 
climate change-related losses and damages and how 
to address them, which the framework strives to 
contribute to. However, the framework is also more 
broadly applicable to non-climate-related hazards, 
such as earthquakes, as its general components and 
approaches are universal. 
Including references to both extreme events and 
sudden-onset events broadens the work of climate 
change adaptation, loss and damage and the DRR 
communities. This approach also allows for events 
that do not ﬁt neatly into a sudden-onset and slow-
onset classiﬁcation. For example, drought cannot 
be easily classiﬁed as either. Rainfall and other data 
may indicate its general start and end, but drought 
is not considered a sudden-onset event; it also is 
not continuous (with no clear end) in the way slow-
onset events are. In the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), drought is 
classiﬁed as an extreme event (UNFCCC, 2012).
The slow-onset events considered for the framework 
follow the deﬁnition of UNFCCC (2012) to “evolve 
gradually from incremental changes occurring 
over many years or from an increased frequency 
or intensity of recurring events”. At this stage, this 
framework considers the following as slow-onset 
events: sea level rise, increasing temperatures, ocean 
acidiﬁcation and glacial retreat. The loss assessment 
requires spatially and temporally explicit information 
on such events. 
Assessment of hazardous events can be done using 
remote sensing data, geographical information 
systems (GIS) and in situ monitoring to map the 
spatial extent and the respective intensity of the 
event(s) in question for the assessment of losses to be 
undertaken. For example, the extent and depth of the 
inundated area after a ﬂood or the temperature and 
soil moisture during a drought can be documented to 
record the intensity of the given event(s). For each 
type of event, hazard characteristics (e.g. extent and 
intensity) are assessed diﬀerently and require ﬁt-for-
purpose metrics. These are documented in the Hazard 
Information Proﬁles (UNDRR and ISC, 2025). 
Disaster and meteorological communities (scientiﬁc 
entities such as hydrometeorological or oceanographic 
services) are already conducting assessments on 
extreme and sudden-onset events and slow-onset 
events, and their work can provide an important 
foundation for hazard information. Existing statistical 
and monitoring frameworks that track hazardous 
events and related losses, such as the Sendai 
Framework Monitor and the Global Disaster-Related 
Statistics Framework, should be considered and used. 
To address data gaps and uncertainties, it is 
recommended to integrate diverse data sources, 
such as remote sensing, ﬁeld surveys, citizen science 
and indigenous knowledge. Sensitivity analyses and 
transparent reporting of uncertainty (e.g. conﬁdence 
intervals, data limitations) should be standard 
practice, supporting risk-informed and adaptive 
decision-making.
© Naja Bertolt Jensen / Unsplash
19A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 20
4. Ecosystem and 
biodiversity context
Hazardous events can have various detrimental 
impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems (see, 
for example, IPCC, 2022; IPBES, 2019; UNFCCC, 
2024). To assess how these manifest as losses, it is 
essential to ﬁrst understand the context in which the 
assessment of losses is to be performed.
Therefore, the ecosystem and biodiversity context is 
an integral component of the presented framework 
and includes three dimensions: i) ecosystem extent, 
ii) ecosystem condition, including biodiversity, and 
iii) diverse values of nature and ecosystem services. 
The extent of an ecosystem refers to its size, 
measured in spatial area and/or length or volume 
(UNSD, 2024). The condition of an ecosystem in this 
framework is understood to reﬂect an ecosystem’s 
structure and functioning and can be referred to 
as the composition of biotic and abiotic elements 
and the ﬂows of energy and materials through them 
(IPBES, 2025a; Grizetti and others, 2019; UNSD, 
2024). Biodiversity is fundamental to the condition 
of ecosystems; scientiﬁc evidence highlights that 
species’ functional characteristics determine 
ecosystem properties and the ﬂow of material and 
energy (Maes and others, 2013; Hong and others, 
2021; Hooper and others, 2005). The diverse values 
of nature are highlighted by the concept of Nature’s 
Contributions to People (NCP), which integrates 
both material and non-material beneﬁts of nature, 
while acknowledging diﬀerent cultural backgrounds 
and worldviews that shape how people relate to the 
natural world (Díaz and others, 2018). Within this 
broader framing, the concept of ecosystem services 
oﬀers a structured way to describe these beneﬁts, 
referring to provisioning (e.g. food, water), regulating 
(e.g. climate regulation, ﬂood control), cultural (e.g. 
spiritual and recreational) and supporting services 
(e.g. nutrient cycling, soil formation) that underpin 
life on Earth (MEA, 2005a). Ecosystem services are 
a fundamental contribution to human well-being, 
as the support provided by the natural environment 
constitutes the basis for human security, resources for 
livelihoods, health, good social relations and freedom 
(MEA, 2005b).
This structure acknowledges that the extent and 
condition of ecosystems, including their biodiversity, 
are fundamental for their functioning. Changes in 
extent and condition can have negative impacts, with 
palpable eﬀects on the composition of biotic and 
abiotic elements and the ﬂows of energy and materials. 
Further, the extent and condition of an ecosystem, as 
well as the state of its biodiversity, largely determine 
its capacity to provide ecosystem services and diverse 
values to diﬀerent groups of people. 
However, this framework also acknowledges that 
ecosystems are highly dynamic, as deﬁned by the 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD, 2025): “A 
dynamic complex of plant, animal and microorganism 
communities and their non-living environment 
interacting as a functional unit”. Ecosystems evolve 
over time, resulting from changes in environmental 
conditions through cycles of disturbance and recovery. 
In addition, ecosystem conditions may also be 
inﬂuenced by ongoing human-induced pressures – 
such as resource overexploitation, extractive activities 
and land-use changes related to urbanization or 
agricultural practices – which can interact with 
natural disturbances and shape observed ecosystem 
changes. Often, these disturbances – such as wildﬁres, 
large-scale ﬂoods or pest outbreaks – are essential 
for maintaining ecological integrity and enabling 
renewal processes. For example, certain forest or 
wetland ecosystems depend on periodic ﬂooding or 
ﬁre to regenerate, maintain species diversity or reset 
successional stages (see, for example, Rowe and 
Scotter, 1973; Sandi and others, 2020). 
The essential nature of some natural disturbances 
to ecosystem health should also be considered to 
capture the natural variability and disturbance-driven 
dynamics of ecosystems and distinguish them from 
changes that exceed natural boundaries and lead to 
degradation or loss. This is why regular monitoring is 
encouraged and considered essential in understanding 
ecosystem dynamics. Monitoring disturbances is 
highly relevant for providing reference levels for 
the ecosystem context and can serve as a basis for 
comparing changes in relation to the hazard context. 
Furthermore, it supports a better understanding of 
ecosystems and informed decision-making regarding 
ecosystem management.
21A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
© Matt Palmer / Unsplash
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 22
5. Assessing climate change 
and disaster-related losses of 
biodiversity and ecosystem 
services
When spatial and temporal overlays show that 
hazardous events coincide with and result in 
changes of ecosystem extent, condition or services, 
or diverse values of nature, then there may have 
been losses in biodiversity and ecosystem services. 
An assessment should be conducted at this point 
to capture negative changes in the ecosystem and 
biodiversity context related to the hazardous events. 
The loss assessment compares the post-event 
conditions of the ecosystem and biodiversity context 
with pre-event conditions. Baseline and reference-
level data, as well as reference-level monitoring, 
are thus required to compare with most recent data 
and determine losses. For this framework, both 
“baseline” and “reference level” terms are used. 
It should be acknowledged that a baseline might 
be associated with an optimal state, which is hard 
to determine for an ecosystem. Comparatively, a 
reference level is more ﬂexible, as it considers the 
dynamic status of ecosystems as a basis, including 
prior to an event, at a certain point in the past, or in 
its natural/pristine state. This terminology is aligned 
with the SEEA EA (UNSD, 2024). Reference levels 
should be periodically reviewed and updated to reﬂect 
new scientiﬁc knowledge and changing ecological 
conditions so they are as relevant, actionable and 
scientiﬁcally robust as possible. This approach is 
consistent with best practices in ecological monitoring 
and restoration (IPBES, 2019; Leclère and others, 
2020). Importantly, reference-level data and the data 
used for periodic comparison need to be measured 
under the same conditions. For example, certain types 
of wetlands are more vulnerable to changes during 
a dry season, and losses during a dry season (e.g. 
due to wildﬁres) should not be assessed against the 
condition of the same wetland during a wet season.
How the reference-level monitoring and the loss 
assessment are conducted depends on whether the 
negative changes in the ecosystem and biodiversity 
context are related to extreme and sudden-onset 
events or slow-onset events, as described in 
chapter 5.1.
5.1. Reference-level monitoring for the assessment of losses for 
extreme and sudden-onset events and slow-onset events 
Extreme and sudden-onset events tend to cause 
immediate, measurable damage that can be captured 
through rapid or initial assessments, while slow-
onset events lead to gradual, cumulative losses that 
are often harder to quantify and qualify and require 
long-term ecological monitoring and context-speciﬁc 
evaluation. However, in practice, slow-onset and 
extreme and sudden-onset events can overlap and 
interact along a continuum of events (see chapter 6). 
This framework treats them as two categories for 
analytical clarity and distinct assessment of losses. 
Some losses related to a storm surge, for example, 
can (theoretically) be assessed right after the event 
using reference data from the pre-event phase. 
Ocean acidiﬁcation, on the other hand, does not 
have a deﬁned start or end point. Therefore, it is 
unclear at what point the assessment of losses is 
to be performed and which data should best serve 
as reference data. Determining losses related to 
slow-onset events, therefore, requires more long-
term tracking. In line with established assessment 
methodologies, rapid assessments primarily capture 
immediate damages and observable eﬀects, while 
longer-term losses and impacts emerge progressively 
during the recovery period. The terminology “slow-
onset events” is commonly used in the context
23A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
of climate change (UNFCCC, 2024) and will also 
be adopted in this framework. Since there are 
often events with no clearly determinable start 
or end points, some conceptually consider these 
are processes (UNDRR, 2023). For both extreme 
and sudden-onset events and slow-onset events, 
reference-level data are required against which 
the most recent data (for extreme and sudden-
onset events: post-event data) can be assessed to 
determine losses.
5.1.1. Extreme and sudden-onset events
Looking more closely at extreme and sudden-onset 
events, baseline or reference-level data refers to pre-
event data. This includes data on ecosystem extent, 
condition/biodiversity, values and services collected 
continuously before the event in question. To assess 
loss, post-event data on the same variables are 
compared with this reference-level data. The observed 
change, such as reduction of ecosystem extent or 
reduction of net primary productivity after the event, 
indicates potential losses. This is illustrated in 
ﬁgure 2.
To support the operationalization of the approaches 
proposed in this framework, the Disaster & Hazardous 
Events, Losses and Damages Tracking & Analysis 
(DELTA) Resilience system is identiﬁed as a key 
implementation platform. Developed by UNDRR 
in collaboration with the World Meteorological 
Organization and the United Nations Development 
Programme, DELTA Resilience provides a standardized 
structure for tracking hazardous events together 
with associated damages and losses across sectors 
and hazard types. Its integrated approach – linking 
hazard characteristics, exposure and vulnerability 
conditions, and observed eﬀects – enables progressive 
incorporation of more comprehensive losses 
information, including biodiversity and ecosystem-
services losses as outlined in this framework. While 
current applications are particularly suited to 
documenting losses associated with extreme and 
sudden-onset events, the framework can capture 
longer-term and cumulative losses, including those 
linked to slow-onset events. The framework, therefore, 
builds upon DELTA Resilience by helping to identify 
and structure additional data and assessment 
dimensions required for more comprehensive losses 
tracking over time. A detailed overview of the DELTA 
Resilience system is provided in Box 1.
5.1.2. Slow-onset events
Compared with extreme and sudden-onset events, 
developing a standardized approach to track and 
assess losses from slow-onset events is more 
complex. Figure 3 shows that establishing a data 
baseline or a reference level ideally builds on data 
collection at multiple points in time prior to the 
assessment of losses. Because slow-onset events 
often lack a delineable start date, monitoring and 
collecting data at multiple points in time enables 
the collection of pre-event data while accounting for 
changing reference levels. Ideally, such monitoring of 
ecosystem variables and biodiversity is continuously 
conducted in countries. 
The above-described steps for mapping and 
monitoring are given as inspiration for how to 
do so. It is, however, acknowledged that such 
monitoring systems are often not in place and, 
therefore, limited data are available. For both 
slow-onset and extreme and sudden-onset events, 
anecdotal data should be included alongside data 
obtained through remote sensing, modelling or 
ecological in situ measurements. This may include 
information collected through participatory mapping 
or storytelling, as well as alternative data and 
information formats, including pictures or testimonies. 
Integrating diverse data sources, including both 
quantitative and qualitative data, enhances spatial 
and temporal coverage, improves result accuracy and 
supports the comprehensive assessment of losses, 
particularly where data gaps exist. Such data and 
information can be captured using the UNDRR DELTA 
Resilience system.
Extreme and sudden-onset event
Loss
assessment
Reference-level
monitoring
Intensity of event
Time
Figure 2: Reference-level monitoring and assessment 
of losses in the context of extreme and sudden-onset 
events. Example: assessing the extent and condition 
of a riparian forest before and after a ﬂood event.
Source: Authors.
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 24
In contrast to assessing losses induced by extreme 
and sudden-onset events, determining losses from 
slow-onset events requires not only comparison of 
data from two points in time, but change detection 
that builds on a comparison of data on ecosystem 
extent, condition/biodiversity and services and values 
collected at multiple points in time prior to and during 
the event with the most recent data. This is because 
slow-onset events are, in fact, continuous processes 
in which losses accumulate. Hence, tracking and 
assessing related losses require long-term monitoring, 
especially since slow-onset events, such as sea level 
rise and temperature increase, are not expected to 
halt in the near future, and losses might continue 
to occur. Countries lacking regular monitoring can 
initiate periodic surveys, establish sentinel sites 
and participate in global observation networks to 
build long-term data sets. By employing low-cost 
sensors, community-based monitoring and remote 
sensing, data collection can be enhanced, enabling 
the detection of gradual ecosystem changes linked to 
slow-onset events.
Existing monitoring systems and data sets can help 
track slow-onset events and, therefore, support the 
Box 1: Disaster & Hazardous Events, Losses and Damages Tracking & Analysis 
(DELTA) Resilience 
Disaster & Hazardous Events, Losses and Damages Tracking and Analysis (DELTA) Resilience is a next-
generation disaster tracking system developed by the United Nations Oﬃce for Disaster Risk Reduction in 
collaboration with the World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Development Programme. 
It supports countries in systematically recording hazardous events together with associated damages and 
losses using a standardized and risk-informed data structure. More than a software application, DELTA 
Resilience combines methodological frameworks, data standards, governance arrangements, capacity 
development and open-source digital tools to strengthen nationally owned disaster tracking systems. 
Unlike traditional disaster loss databases that primarily document damages and economic losses after 
events occur, DELTA Resilience integrates information across the disaster risk continuum. The system 
records hazardous events – including their spatial and temporal extent and physical characteristics, such as 
magnitude and intensity – alongside observed damages, service disruptions and losses across sectors. It also 
enables the inclusion of reference information on pre-event exposure and vulnerability conditions, allowing 
losses to be analysed in relation to underlying risk drivers.
DELTA Resilience follows internationally aligned hazard classiﬁcations and supports standardized reporting 
across hazards, sectors and geographic scales. Data can be disaggregated across population groups, 
including by sex, age and disability, when referring to human impacts, and the system allows documentation 
of both economic and non-economic losses, such as health eﬀects, displacement and service disruptions.
By linking hazardous events, exposure and vulnerability conditions, damages and losses within a single 
structure, DELTA Resilience provides a foundation for progressively expanding disaster loss accounting. This 
includes the integration of biodiversity and ecosystem-services losses through comparison of post-event 
changes against ecological reference conditions and ongoing monitoring approaches.
For further information, see: 
DELTA Resilience: Disaster losses and damages tracking system (deltaresilience.org)
Updated reference 
levels over time
Slow-onset event
Loss
assessment
Time
Intensity of event
T1
T2
T3
Figure 3: Reference-level monitoring and assessment 
of losses in the context of slow-onset events. 
Example: assessing coral reef condition under 
progressive ocean acidiﬁcation and warming.
Source: Authors.
25A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
assessment of related losses of biodiversity and 
ecosystem services for countries/regions that do not 
have their own tracking systems. 
In the case of both extreme and sudden-onset events 
and slow-onset events, the data obtained at the point 
of, or shortly after, the event occurred can be used as 
the start for continuous monitoring of the ecosystem’s 
extent, condition/biodiversity, services and values. 
Continuous reference-level monitoring provides a 
detailed picture of an ecosystem’s state and enables 
monitoring of ecosystem recovery and the progression 
of losses in the context of slow-onset events, such 
as sea level rise. In the case of extreme and sudden-
onset events, more long-term monitoring could also 
help track cascading losses occurring well after the 
initial event. In the face of future hazards, this data 
can be used as the basis for a new reference level 
against which further changes are measured. 
5.2. Reference-level monitoring for assessing losses of biodiversity 
and ecosystem services 
In order to assess climate change and disaster-
related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services, 
the baseline or reference level of the ecosystem 
and biodiversity context must be established. This 
chapter elaborates on reference-level monitoring 
for ecosystem extent (chapter 5.2.1), ecosystem 
condition, including biodiversity (chapter 5.2.2) and 
diverse values of nature and ecosystem services 
(chapter 5.2.3). The reference-level monitoring 
proposed here is aligned with SEEA EA as an already 
existing internationally agreed statistical framework.
Importantly, the framework accommodates for varying 
data types and availability, including high- and low-
resolution data and community-drawn maps, among 
others. National- and/or local-level assessments 
of losses will, therefore, depend on what data are 
available as reference-level data relative to the point 
at which the loss is being determined. Appropriate 
limitations can be noted while acknowledging that 
there is value in using qualitative or anecdotal data to 
estimate the spatial extent of important ecosystems.
5.2.1. Ecosystem extent 
Using spatially explicit data (such as remote sensing 
data and GIS) helps track changes in ecosystem 
services both spatially and temporally. The spatial 
component enables monitoring of the size of 
individual and interconnected ecosystems; the 
temporal component makes it possible to track 
the long-term changes in ecosystems that emerge 
and evolve over time. Existing and ground-truthed 
ecosystem maps can be simple or elaborate based 
on data available and in-country capacity and may 
also be relevant for the interpretation of remotely 
sensed data. 
There is currently no single, universally (global) 
accepted deﬁnition or classiﬁcation system for all 
ecosystems, although several major frameworks have 
been developed to promote greater harmonization 
at the global level. One of the most comprehensive 
is from the International Union for Conservation of 
Nature Global Ecosystem Typology (IUCN GET; IUCN, 
2020a), which oﬀers a hierarchical structure for 
Box 2: The System of Environmental-Economic Accounting – Ecosystem Accounting 
The System of Environmental-Economic Accounting – Ecosystem Accounting (SEEA EA; UNSD, 2024) is an 
internationally agreed statistical framework that provides standardized methods for measuring ecosystems, 
biodiversity and ecosystem services within an accounting structure consistent with national statistics. SEEA 
EA organizes information through ecosystem extent, ecosystem condition and ecosystem services accounts, 
enabling systematic observation of ecosystems and their changes over time.
In the context of disaster and climate change assessment, SEEA EA supports the establishment of reference 
or baseline conditions against which ecosystem changes can be assessed. By distinguishing ecosystem 
assets, their condition and the services they generate, the framework enables the identiﬁcation of losses 
related not only to physical damage but also to declines in ecosystem functioning and service provision.
The reference-level monitoring proposed in this framework aligns with SEEA EA concepts and accounting 
structures, supporting consistency with internationally agreed statistical standards and facilitating 
integration with environmental and disaster-related statistics.
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 26
classifying ecosystems, ranging from broad functional 
groups, such as terrestrial forests or freshwater rivers, 
to more speciﬁc ecosystem types, such as tropical-
subtropical forests or palustrine wetlands. SEEA EA 
supports the use of IUCN GET or equivalent national 
ecosystem classiﬁcations. An interactive web map 
enables the extraction of global or country-speciﬁc 
spatial ecosystem data, via IUCN GET, making it one 
of several practical tools supporting the collection of 
ecosystem extent data to establish a reference level 
aligned with global standards.
5.2.2. Ecosystem condition, including 
biodiversity
Ecosystem condition is deﬁned by the quality of 
abiotic and biotic ﬂows within an ecosystem. To 
capture abiotic and biotic ﬂow quality and to establish 
a reference condition against which changes can 
be tracked, SEEA EA proposes a set of ecosystem 
conditions that guide the selection of variables 
and indicators. These include physical, chemical, 
compositional, structural and functional state 
characteristics, as well as landscape and seascape 
characteristics. Biodiversity-related indicators, 
including those aligned with Essential Biodiversity 
Variables (EBVs), can be integrated within condition 
accounts. The EBVs include variables such as 
genetic diversity, species abundance, phenology 
and primary productivity (GEO-BON, 2025). EBVs 
enable monitoring of and reporting on biodiversity 
change and indicators sensitive to ecosystem change, 
making these variables crucial for tracking ecosystem 
responses and losses under climate change and 
disaster impacts. 
Tracking changes in the ecosystem condition, 
including biodiversity, can be supported by 
remote sensing and GIS. However, further in situ 
measurements of ecological variables or indicator 
species are pivotal for comprehensive assessments. 
Many communities (both geographic and sectoral) 
who beneﬁt directly from or live as part of ecosystems 
may have valuable insights into how these ecosystems 
have changed or are changing, particularly in 
reference to hazardous events. Such information 
may prove valuable on its own or for validating 
other observational records. National or community 
archives are also useful sources for reference-level 
and/or impact data on changes over time.
5.2.3. Diverse values of nature and 
ecosystem services
One speciﬁc ambition of the framework is to promote 
a more comprehensive perspective that considers, 
to the extent possible, diverse values of nature. 
The Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services framework on 
NCP can guide the assessment of diverse values. The 
framework builds on the ecosystem services concept, 
with its 18 reporting categories (MEA, 2005b), but 
provides additional guidance on assessing other 
values that cannot be captured adequately by the 
reporting categories. It gives equal importance to 
instrumental, relational and intrinsic values, such 
as cultural heritage or social cohesion, and applies 
a pluralistic valuation approach (IPBES, 2025b). The 
NCP approach considers diverse actors, disciplines 
and worldviews, such as more polycentric worldviews 
and indigenous and local knowledge systems, that 
view humans as living in, with or as nature, rather than 
living oﬀ nature (IPBES, 2019; IPBES, 2022). 
Capturing such diverse values would enable a better 
understanding of cascading impacts of biodiversity 
and ecosystem service losses as deﬁned by UNFCCC 
(2024), such as identity, dignity, habitability and 
other dimensions of well-being. As the NCP approach 
is yet to be operationalized, concrete data sources 
are not available. Nevertheless, countries should 
feel encouraged to check available and alternative 
resources and include qualitative statements, 
pictures and local and indigenous stories, obtained 
through participatory methods and other forms of 
communication, that can help to assess diverse 
values of nature and depict the impacts of hazards on 
ecosystems more comprehensibly (IPBES, 2019). 
It is acknowledged that framing and capturing data on 
the diverse values of nature is complex and beyond 
what countries might be able to do. Focusing on 
assessing changes in ecosystem extent and condition is, 
therefore, a practical starting point for the assessment 
of losses. Nevertheless, exploring diverse values is 
highly encouraged to enable a holistic assessment of 
losses and what these losses mean for people.
The provision of ecosystem services can be mapped 
spatially and assessed using a wide range of methods, 
including modelling, in situ measurements and 
qualitative or quantitative analyses. Within the 
SEEA EA, assessment and mapping of ecosystem 
services follow a standardized approach carried out 
at the country level. Easily accessible web mapping 
resources that provide data from global data sets 
remain limited in their capacity to capture the full 
range of ecosystem services and speciﬁcities at 
national and subnational levels.
27A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
5.3. The assessment of losses
Capturing changes to the ecosystem and biodiversity 
context related to hazardous events enables the ﬁnal 
assessment of losses. 
This relies on the reference-level monitoring outlined 
in chapter 5.2, which is speciﬁc to the hazard context. 
By comparing the ecosystem and biodiversity context 
with previous points in time (reference levels), 
negative changes in ecosystem extent, condition 
and diverse values of nature and services can be 
identiﬁed. These negative changes, such as loss 
of coastal wetlands to sea level rise (changes in 
ecosystem extent), or climate-driven disappearances 
of species (changes in biodiversity) or the drying up of 
sacred waters (changes in diverse values), would be 
considered losses. 
It should be noted again that this framework 
presents only an approach to ﬁll gaps in data and 
understanding relating to ecosystem and biodiversity 
losses. To elaborate further and to ensure this 
framework’s applicability, the next step is to use 
it for the assessment of losses in diﬀerent hazard, 
ecosystem and country contexts.
5.4. Use cases of the framework
Through its component-based structure, this 
framework not only supports the identiﬁcation and 
assessment of losses, but it can inform other use 
cases in the context of environmental management 
and policy development. By promoting regular 
monitoring of ecosystem extent, condition, 
biodiversity, diverse values and ecosystem services, 
and by enabling the structured assessment of 
losses, the framework supports building evidence for 
informed decision-making across conservation and 
restoration planning, DRR and climate risk ﬁnance.
5.4.1. Use cases informed by regular 
monitoring
An inherent part of the framework is 
the promotion of regular monitoring 
of the ecosystem context. Such 
monitoring directly supports 
ecosystem management by enabling practitioners 
and policymakers to track changes over time, identify 
past, current and future degradation trends and 
assess the eﬀectiveness of management interventions.
Regular monitoring also informs 
exposure and vulnerability 
assessments by investigating how 
changes in ecosystem extent and 
condition aﬀect the capacity of ecosystems to 
provide provisioning, cultural and regulating services, 
including those that contribute to mitigation of 
hazards (Mitchell and others, 2013; Grizetti and others, 
2019). Any reduction of this capacity can increase the 
exposure and vulnerability of socioecological systems, 
including individuals, communities and ecosystems 
themselves, to climate-related hazards (Sudmeier-
Rieux and others, 2021; Walz and others, 2021). By 
capturing these dynamics, regular monitoring enables 
a better understanding of risk and the development of 
targeted risk reduction strategies.
In addition, monitoring promoted by 
this framework can inform natural 
capital accounting processes. As the 
framework aligns with the United 
Nations SEEA EA, it supports eﬀorts to compile 
standardized information on ecosystem extent, 
condition and service provision.
Beyond these direct applications, 
regular monitoring further informs 
planning processes, particularly NbS 
planning, as well as conservation 
and restoration planning. Information and data, 
particularly on changes in ecosystem condition, 
biodiversity and ecosystem services, are essential for 
identifying where NbS, conservation and restoration 
interventions are needed. The IUCN Global Standard 
for Nature-based Solutions (IUCN, 2020b) deﬁnes NbS 
as “actions that result in a net gain to biodiversity 
and ecosystem integrity”. Compliance with this 
standard requires NbS to be based on evidence-based 
assessments of ecosystem state and prevailing drivers 
of degradation and loss. The framework supports this 
requirement by facilitating systematic monitoring 
and loss identiﬁcation, thereby ensuring that NbS 
interventions directly respond to observed ecosystem 
needs rather than assumed conditions.
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 28
5.4.2. Use cases informed by the 
assessment of losses
The assessment of losses enabled 
by the framework directly supports 
international and national policy 
processes, including reporting under 
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
(Targets C and D) and potentially the Global Goal on 
Adaptation (Target 9d on reducing climate impacts 
on ecosystems and biodiversity). It can enhance 
transparency in loss and damage information 
processes, such as BTRs under the Paris Agreement, 
as well as inform national adaptation planning. When 
developing or updating their NAPs, for example, 
countries could integrate assessments of losses 
results into the assessment of climate hazards, 
vulnerabilities and risks, and impacts of climate 
change impacts, as well as into the development 
of climate change scenarios (Element A of the NAP 
development process; UNFCCC LDC Expert Group, 
2025) to inform adaptation action that considers the 
environment. 
Similarly, ﬁndings of assessments of 
losses can inform the development of 
national DRR strategies by identifying 
disaster risks, impacts and trends to 
guide appropriate interventions (Phase 1, Step 1 of 
the development of national DRR strategies process; 
UNDRR, 2019). By explicitly capturing biodiversity 
and ecosystem-services losses, the framework 
aids data collection that can inform targets of the 
Sendai Framework Monitor, including Target C, direct 
economic losses and Target D, speciﬁcally Indicator 
C-5 (direct economic loss resulting from damaged 
or destroyed critical infrastructure attributed to 
disasters) and Indicator D-4 (number of other 
destroyed or damaged critical infrastructure units and 
facilities attributed to disasters) (UNGA, 2016; Walz 
and others, 2021; Walz and others, 2022). 
A better understanding of losses of 
biodiversity and ecosystem services 
informs engagement with the Santiago 
Network by helping countries articulate 
speciﬁc technical assistance needs and integrate 
environmental considerations into climate risk and 
DRR ﬁnance mechanisms, particularly in the context 
of the newly established Fund for responding to Loss 
and Damage (FLRD) (UNFCCC, 2024). As it enables 
countries to conduct assessments and report on 
the biodiversity and ecosystem service losses, one 
ambition of the framework is to further support the 
submission of funding requests more broadly.
At the international level, aggregated 
application of this framework can 
contribute to the knowledge base of 
the Warsaw International Mechanism 
for Loss and Damage, particularly informing the 
workstreams on slow-onset events, non-economic 
losses and comprehensive risk management. 
Systematic environmental loss data can support 
synthesis reports of the Executive Committee and 
strengthen coherence between DRR, biodiversity 
policy under the CBD, and the UNFCCC loss and 
damage agenda.
Integrating considerations of losses of 
biodiversity and ecosystem services 
into decision-making on climate risk 
and DRR ﬁnance also supports more 
eﬀective allocation of resources to conservation, 
restoration and NbS, ensuring that such eﬀorts 
receive adequate ﬁnancial support to enhance DRR, 
adaptation and resilience.
29A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
© Nandhu Kumar / Unsplash
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 30
6. Important considerations 
related to this framework
1)  When applying this framework, consider multi-
hazard and compounding hazards perspectives 
when assessing losses. This is a key element of 
DELTA Resilience.
Although it is important to understand how the 
assessment of extreme and sudden-onset events 
diﬀers from slow-onset events, it should be 
acknowledged that a clear distinction between the 
two is often challenging, as they are interlinked and 
might cascade, compound or inﬂuence each other. For 
example, IPCC reports that compounding heatwaves 
and droughts have become and are projected to 
become more frequent across multiple regions (IPCC, 
2023). Other authors document that storm surges 
resulting from tropical cyclones are likely to intensify 
with a higher mean sea level (Lockwood and others, 
2022). IPCC concludes that sea level rise compounding 
with storm surges and heavy rainfall events increases 
ﬂood risks (IPCC, 2023). Similarly, scientiﬁc evidence 
shows that rising temperatures and arid tree biomass 
increase the likelihood of wildﬁres (Goodwin and 
others, 2021), and heatwaves are becoming more 
intense due to the interplay of higher temperatures 
and ocean–land–atmosphere interactions (Beobide-
Arsuaga and others, 2025). 
2)  When applying this framework, adopt a 
conservative approach when attributing losses to 
a driver, whether climate change or other drivers. 
Explicitly document data gaps and uncertainty that 
inﬂuence the assessment of losses. 
Beyond the complexity of deﬁning start and end 
dates for assessing losses induced by slow-onset 
events, relating losses to these events as primary 
drivers is more challenging. As slow-onset events 
unfold over longer time periods, so do their impacts, 
usually resulting in more gradual than abrupt losses 
of biodiversity and ecosystem services, for example 
through species range shifts, localized extinctions, 
changes in phenology and changes in the composition, 
structure and function of ecosystems (Pecl and others, 
2017; Heinze and others, 2021; Panetta and others, 
2018; Román-Palacios and Wiens, 2020; IPCC, 2022). 
Disentangling the observed losses resulting from slow-
onset events from those caused by other drivers, such 
as land-use change or pollution, is highly complex. 
This general assumption needs to be treated carefully, 
though, as there are instances where slowly unfolding 
processes cross thresholds and, in consequence, cause 
abrupt losses. Studies by Berdugo and others (2020, 
2021), for example, explain how rising temperatures and 
increasingly arid conditions lead to abrupt changes in 
ecosystems’ structural and functional attributes. 
There is also a need to acknowledge the role of 
inherent ecosystem dynamics and climate variability 
as drivers of losses. IPCC explains that it “is often 
uncertain whether the changes are caused by a change 
in the mean [natural climate variability], variance 
[climate change-related extremes], or both” (IPCC, 
2001). The same diﬃculty applies to the diﬀerentiation 
between natural ecosystem dynamics and changes 
related to hazardous events. Therefore, the presented 
framework takes a conservative approach, looking at 
all losses in a ﬁrst step. More detailed assessments 
can shed more light on speciﬁc drivers and help 
understand which losses are related to the pertinent 
event(s). Establishing such in-depth understanding can 
be a ﬁrst step towards actually attributing losses to 
climate change and/or speciﬁc events.
3)  Implement this framework iteratively, starting 
with one or two priority ecosystems or hazards, to 
account for ecosystem complexity. Learnings can 
help enhance the assessment of losses in the next 
iteration, such as enabling better reﬂections on 
spatial dynamics or tipping points. When resources 
are available, implement regular monitoring for 
the collection of reference data that inform the 
assessment of losses, as well as additional use 
cases (such as NbS planning).
Further, this framework assumes that hazardous 
events have mainly detrimental eﬀects on ecosystems 
and biodiversity, such as reductions in ecosystem 
extent and habitat fragmentation, deterioration of 
ecosystem condition and loss of species, and depletion 
of ecosystem services and diverse values of nature. 
It should be considered, however, that events do not 
always cause loss in all three of these dimensions. 
Liu and others (2018), for example, document that 
habitat fragmentation and associated biodiversity loss 
cause severe disruptions to ecosystem functions and 
worsening conditions in small patches. However, if 
the reduction in ecosystem extent is not as signiﬁcant 
and the fragments remain rather large, ecosystem
31A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
functions are observed to be well maintained, 
despite the disruptions. Therefore, a change in 
ecosystem extent related to a hazardous event does 
not automatically imply a loss of good condition, 
biodiversity or ecosystem services. It still must be 
considered that more frequent and intense events 
might, after all, exceed the resilience of ecosystems.
In addition, spatial and temporal dynamics of losses 
of biodiversity and ecosystem services must be kept 
in mind when performing an assessment of losses. 
Factoring in spatial dynamics is especially critical in the 
context of ecosystems that are highly interconnected. 
While hazardous events might seem to impact only 
one speciﬁc area or ecosystem, losses to biodiversity 
and ecosystem services within that ecosystem can 
aﬀect others outside it (e.g. through upstream–
downstream connections in riverine systems). 
Temporal dynamics should also be considered during 
an assessment of losses. For example, an assessment 
that is made shortly after a disaster unfolds (which 
is key and necessary for immediate emergency 
management and recovery) may hide long-term 
impacts that only manifest over time. Ferraz and 
others (2020) summarize studies that investigated 
the time lag between reoccurring disturbances and 
the manifestation of impacts on the structures and 
functions of a coral reef. They describe how cyclones, 
bleaching events and outbreaks of venomous starﬁsh 
species led to a decline of living coral cover and overall 
biomass loss. In the long term, a decade after the initial 
series of events, species abundance and biomass were 
recorded as recovered. However, the coral ecosystems’ 
nutrient cycling eﬃciency through the food chain was 
not. Overall, the ecosystem lost structural complexity 
and became less productive. 
On the other hand, ecosystems can bounce back and 
regenerate over time. As an assessment of losses can 
only capture a snapshot of a regenerative process, it 
is unlikely to reﬂect whether the observed losses are 
temporary and the ecosystem can recover from them, 
or whether they are permanent. Though such temporal 
dynamics are important for understanding the impact of 
losses on ecosystems, they do not negate the temporal 
impact. It is also relevant to the future provision of 
ecosystem services, such as food and the regulation of 
extreme and sudden-onset events. Regular monitoring 
and collection of reference data are already important 
steps towards assessing such long-term losses. As it 
also allows for monitoring the dynamics of ecosystems, 
which need to be considered in the assessment of 
losses, such regular monitoring is highly encouraged. 
The application of this framework for the assessment 
of losses in diﬀerent hazard, ecosystem and cultural 
contexts is needed to capture and understand such 
spatial and temporal dynamics more comprehensively. 
The maturity of ecosystems, such as critical slowing 
down parameters, thresholds and tipping points, is 
not included in this framework, as it is meant to be 
a basis to inspire countries when assessing losses of 
biodiversity and ecosystem services. These aspects are 
crucial, but the framework lacks proper methodology 
to address them comprehensively. Therefore, these are 
considerations that should be looked at more closely 
when applying this framework in cooperation with 
diﬀerent countries. The same holds true for cascading 
losses: although they are encapsulated in the 
framework through the understanding that the loss of 
ecosystem services and diverse values of nature trickle 
down into an entire socioecological system, concrete 
steps on how to assess cascading losses need to be 
further investigated.
Further, suggestions of concrete indicators for 
assessing losses based on ecosystem extent, 
condition/biodiversity, ecosystem services and 
diverse values are subject to the application of this 
framework. The framework presented here outlines 
the process to conduct an assessment of losses 
with varied uses of standardized methodologies, 
to encourage countries to utilize available data or 
enhance other data sources that can support loss 
assessments. While some examples of indicators 
exist and are highlighted in the overview of provided 
data sources (“Annex A – Data sources collection 
to support the assessment of climate change and 
disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem 
services”), the choice of concrete metrics and 
indicators depends on the speciﬁc hazard and 
ecosystem context in which the assessment is to be 
performed. This makes it challenging to suggest a 
universal set of indicators. Nevertheless, applying 
the framework in a real-world context as a next 
step can help elicit more concrete guidance on 
appropriate indicators for the proposed framework 
components and may result in a library of indicators 
for further guidance.
Finally, this framework is applicable for both climate- 
and non-climate-related hazardous contexts, such as 
oil spills or earthquakes. A large emphasis has been 
placed on the climate-related hazard context, given 
the growing role of climate drivers in ecosystem and 
biodiversity losses. Nonetheless, it may be worth 
further elaborating on these, especially regarding data 
sources, to more fully utilize the framework. 
While this framework provides a basis for assessing 
climate- and disaster-related losses of biodiversity 
and ecosystem services, it should be subject to 
regular review and revision during its application, 
incorporating advances in science, technology and 
user experiences, to ensure continuous improvement 
and responsiveness to emerging challenges.
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 32
References
Beobide-Arsuaga, G., and others (2025). Increasing 
central and northern European summer heatwave 
intensity due to forced changes in internal variability. 
Nature Communications, vol. 16. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-025-65392-w.
Berdugo, M., and others (2020). Global ecosystem 
thresholds driven by aridity. Science, vol. 367, 
no. 6479, pp. 787–790. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
aay5958.
Berdugo, M., and others (2021). Ecological 
mechanisms underlying aridity thresholds in global 
drylands. Functional Ecology, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 4–23. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2435.13962. 
Convention on Biological Diversity [CBD] (2025). 
Glossary of terms. Available at https://www.cbd.int/
invasive/terms. 
Díaz, S., and others (2018). Assessing nature’s 
contributions to people. Science, vol. 359, no. 6373, 
pp. 270–272. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aap8826. 
Ferraz, S., and others (2020). On the need to 
diﬀerentiate the temporal trajectories of ecosystem 
structure and functions in restoration programs. 
Tropical Conservation Science, vol. 13, pp. 1–6. https://
doi.org/10.1177/1940082920910314. 
Goodwin, M.J., and others (2021). Climate-driven tree 
mortality and fuel aridity increase wildﬁre’s potential 
heat ﬂux. Geophysical Research Letters, vol. 48, 
no. 24. https://doi.org/10.1029/2021GL094954.
Grizzetti, B., and others (2019). Relationship between 
ecological condition and ecosystem services in 
European rivers, lakes and coastal waters. The Science 
of the Total Environment, vol. 671, pp. 452–465. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.03.155. 
Group on Earth Observations Biodiversity Observation 
Network [GEO-BON] (2025). Essential Biodiversity 
Variables. Available at https://geobon.org/ebvs/what-
are-ebvs.
Heinze, C., and others (2021). The quiet crossing of 
ocean tipping points. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, vol. 118, no. 9. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.2008478118. 
Hong, P., and others (2021). Biodiversity promotes 
ecosystem functioning despite environmental change. 
Ecological Letters, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 555–569. https://
doi.org/10.1111/ele.13936. 
Hooper, D.U., and others (2005). Eﬀects of biodiversity 
on ecosystem functioning: a consensus of current 
knowledge. Ecological Monographics, vol. 75, no. 1., 
pp. 3–35. https://doi.org/10.1890/04-0922. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [IPCC] 
(2001). Climate Change 2001: The Scientiﬁc Basis. 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Third 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change, Houghton, J.T., and others, eds. 
Cambridge and New York, pp. 1 – 881. Available at 
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/
WGI_TAR_full_report.pdf.
 — — — —  (2012). Glossary of terms. In: Managing the 
Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance 
Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report of 
Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC), Field, C.B., and others, eds. 
Cambridge and New York, pp. 555–564. Available at 
https://archive.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-reports/srex/SREX-
Annex_Glossary.pdf. 
— — — —  (2022). Sixth Assessment Report: Working 
Group II – Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. 
In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation 
and Vulnerability, Pörtner, H.-O., and others, eds. 
Cambridge and New York. Available at https://www.
ipcc.ch/report/sixth-assessment-report-working-
group-ii.
— — — —  (2023). Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate 
Change 2023: Synthesis Report Contribution of Working 
Groups I, II and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, The Core 
Writing Team, and others, eds. Geneva. Available at 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr.
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services [IPBES] (2019). 
Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Services of the Intergovernmental Science-
Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem 
Services. Brondizio, E., and others, eds. Bonn. 
Available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3831673.
33A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
— — — —  (2022). Methodological Assessment of the 
Diverse Values and Valuation of Nature of the 
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. Balvanera, 
P., and others, eds. Bonn. Available at https://doi.
org/10.5281/zenodo.7687931. 
— — — —  (2025a). Glossary. Available at https://www.
ipbes.net/glossary. 
— — — —  (2025b). Contrasting approaches to values 
and valuation. Available at https://www.ipbes.net/
contrasting-approaches-values-valuation. 
International Union for Conservation of Nature [IUCN] 
(2020a). The IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology 
2.0: Descriptive Proﬁles for Biomes and Ecosystem 
Functional Groups. Keith, D.A., and others, eds. Gland. 
Available at https:/ /doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.13.en.
International Union for the Conservation of Nature 
[IUCN] (2020b). IUCN Global Standard for Nature-
based Solutions: A User-friendly Framework for the 
Veriﬁcation, Design and Scaling Up of NbS: ﬁrst 
edition. Gland. Available at https://doi.org/10.2305/
IUCN.CH.2020.08.en. 
Leclère, D., and others (2020). Bending the curve of 
terrestrial biodiversity needs an integrated strategy. 
Nature, vol. 585, pp. 551–556. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-020-2705-y. 
Liu, J., and others (2018). How does habitat 
fragmentation aﬀect the biodiversity and ecosystem 
functioning relationship? Landscape Ecology, vol. 33, 
pp. 341–352. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-018-0620-5. 
Lockwood, J., and others (2022). Correlation between 
sea-level rise and aspects of future tropical cyclone 
activity in CMIP6 models. Earths Future, vol. 10, no. 4. 
https://doi.org/10.1029/2021EF002462.
Maes, J., and others (2013). Mapping and 
Assessment of Ecosystems and their Services: An 
EU-wide Ecosystem in Support of the EU Biodiversity 
Strategy. Publications Oﬃce of the European Union. 
Luxembourg. Available at https://data.europa.eu/
doi/10.2760/757183. 
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment [MEA] (2005a). 
Ecosystems and Their Services. In: Ecosystems and 
Human Well-being: A Framework for Assessment. 
Island Press. Washington, D.C. pp. 49–70.
— — — —  (2005b). Ecosystems and Human Well-being. 
A Framework for Assessment. In: Ecosystems and 
Human Well-being: A Framework for Assessment. 
Island Press. Washington, D.C. pp. 71–84.
Mitchell, M., and others (2013). Linking landscape 
connectivity and ecosystem service provision: current 
knowledge and research gaps. Ecosystems, vol. 16, no. 
5, pp. 894–908. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10021-013-
9647-2. 
Panetta, A.M., and others (2018). Climate warming 
drives local extinction: evidence from observation 
and experimentation. Science Advances, vol. 4, no. 2.  
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaq1819. 
Pecl, G.T., and others (2017). Biodiversity 
redistribution under climate change: impacts on 
ecosystems and human well-being. Science, vol. 355, 
no. 6332. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aai9214. 
Román-Palacios, C. and Wiens, J.J. (2020). Recent 
responses to climate change reveal the drivers of 
species extinction and survival. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America, vol. 117, no. 8, pp. 4211–4217. https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.1913007117.
Rowe, J.S. and Scotter, G.W. (1973). Fire in the boreal 
forest. Quaternary Research, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 444–
464. https://doi.org/10.1016/0033-5894(73)90008-2. 
Sandi, S.G., and others (2020). Resilience to drought 
of dryland wetlands threatened by climate change. 
Scientiﬁc Reports, vol. 10. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-020-70087-x. 
Sudmeier-Rieux, K., and others (2021). Scientiﬁc 
evidence for ecosystem-based disaster risk reduction. 
Nature Sustainability, vol. 4, pp. 803–810. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41893-021-00732-4. 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change [UNFCCC] (2012). Slow Onset Events. 
Technical paper. FCCC/TP/2012/7. Bonn. Available at 
https://unfccc.int/documents/7429.
— — — —  (2013). Decision 2/CP.19. Warsaw international 
mechanism for loss and damage associated with 
climate change impacts. Report of the Conference of 
the Parties on its nineteenth session, held in Warsaw 
from 11 to 23 November 2013. Addendum. Part two: 
Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at 
its nineteenth session. Available at https://unfccc.
int/sites/default/ﬁles/resource/docs/2013/cop19/
eng/10a01.pdf.
— — — —  (2024). Non-economic losses. Featuring loss 
of territory and habitability, ecosystem services and 
biodiversity, and cultural heritage. Technical paper. 
Bonn. Available at https://unfccc.int/sites/default/
ﬁles/resource/nels_paper_2024.pdf.
A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 34
— — — —  (2025). Introduction. Available at https://
unfccc.int/topics/adaptation-and-resilience/the-big-
picture/introduction#adaptation.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change [UNFCCC] LDC Expert Group (2025). The NAP 
Technical Guidelines. Updated Technical Guidelines 
for the Process to Formulate and Implement National 
Adaptation Plans. Bonn. Available at https://unfccc.
int/sites/default/ﬁles/resource/Updated_NAP_
Technical_Guidelines_2025_EN.pdf.
United Nations General Assembly [UNGA] (2016). 
Report of the open-ended intergovernmental expert 
working group on indicators and terminology relating 
to disaster risk reduction. Available at https://
www.undrr.org/publication/report-open-ended-
intergovernmental-expert-working-group-indicators-
and-terminology.
United Nations Oﬃce for Disaster Risk Reduction 
[UNDRR] (2017). The Sendai Framework Terminology 
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Available at https://www.
undrr.org/drr-glossary/terminology. 
— — — —  (2019). Words into Action: Developing National 
Disaster Risk Reduction Strategies. Bonn. Available at 
https://www.undrr.org/developing-national-disaster-
risk-reduction-strategies.
— — — —  (2023). Tracking Losses and Damages from 
Slow-onset Events: Issues and Perspectives. Issue Brief. 
Bonn. Available at https://www.undrr.org/publication/
tracking-losses-and-damages-slow-onset-events. 
United Nations Oﬃce for Disaster Risk Reduction 
[UNDRR] and International Science Council [ISC] 
(2025). Hazard Information Proﬁles. 2025 Update. 
Geneva. Available at https://doi.org/10.24948/2025.05. 
United Nations Statistics Division [UNSD] (2024). 
System of Environmental-Economic Accounting: 
Ecosystem Accounting. ST/ESA/STAT/SER.F/124 
(Series F No. 124). New York. Available at https://seea.
un.org/ecosystem-accounting.
van der Geest, K., and others (2019). The Impacts of 
Climate Change on Ecosystem Services and Resulting 
Losses and Damages to People and Society. In: Loss 
and Damage from Climate Change. Climate Risk 
Management, Policy and Governance, Mechler, R., and 
others, eds. Springer. Cham, pp. 221–236. Available at 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-72026-5_9. 
Walz, Y ., and others (2021). Disaster-related losses 
of ecosystems and their services. Why and how do 
losses matter for disaster risk reduction? International 
Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, vol. 63. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2021.102425. 
Walz, Y ., and others (2022). A Way Forward to Monitor 
Disaster-related Losses of Ecosystems and Ecosystem 
Services in the Sendai Framework Monitor. United 
Nations University Institute for Environment and 
Human Security (UNU-EHS). Bonn. Available at https://
collections.unu.edu/view/UNU:8834.
35A framework for assessing climate change and disaster-related losses of biodiversity and ecosystem services 
Imprint
Publisher
United Nations University Institute for Environment and Human Security (UNU-EHS), Bonn, Germany.
A report prepared by the United Nations University – Institute for Environment and Human Security in collaboration 
with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the United Nations Oﬃce for Disaster Risk Reduction 
(UNDRR).
Authors
Yvonne Walz1, Lisa Hartmann1, Sally Janzen1, Chithra Nair Rajendran1, Katharina Kalbitz1, Susan Mlenga1, 
Chawanangwa Nyirenda2, Iria Touzon Calle3, Le-Anne Roper3
¹ United Nations University Institute for Environment and Human Security (UNU-EHS), Bonn, Germany
2 United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Kenya
3 United Nations Oﬃce for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR), Bonn, Germany
Reviewers 
Mozaharul Alam, Abbie Amundsen, Fatemeh Bakhitari, Ida Bjoerk, Nazgul Borkosheva, Michelle DeFreese, Cordula 
Epple, Ansgar Fellendorf, Francesco Gaetani, Natalie Harms, Maarten Hofman, Stefan Kienberger, Ra Kim Bo, 
Anil Kumar, Ning Liu, Neil Aldrin Mallari, Jennica Paula Masigan, Sara Matasci, Jutta May, Nadja Muenstermann, 
Jaroslav Mysiak, Vincent Oeba, Jello D. Ortega, Raquel Smith Ortega, Andrea Ortiz Vargas, Urbano Fra Paleo, Avash 
Pandey, Ekaterina Poleshchuk, Beatriz Pozuelo, Teerapong Praphotjanaporn, Fabian Rackelmann, Johannes Reﬁsch, 
Fabrice Renaud, Mario Salgado, Joshitha Sankam, Nagisa Shiiba, Heidi Tuhkanen, Kees Van der Geest, Douwe Van 
Schie, Boris Van Zanten, Ayda Villalobos-Castro, Animesh Kumar, Toshiya Kai, Jessica Troni, Fruzsina Straus, Anna 
Kilponen, Zita Sebesvari.
Suggested citation
Walz, Y ., and others (2026). A Framework for Assessing Climate Change and Disaster-related Losses of 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services . Bonn, Germany: United Nations University Institute for Environment and 
Human Security (UNU-EHS).
Acknowledgements
Development of this framework emerged from the discussions and key messages from the 8th Asia-Paciﬁc Climate 
Change Adaptation Forum held in 2023 in Incheon, the Republic of Korea. 
Funding source
The project was ﬁnanced by UNEP, UNDRR and the Asia Paciﬁc Adaptation Network, with generous support from 
the Ministry of the Environment, Japan and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency.
Cover image
© Mega Caesaria / Unsplash
Editing, layout and proof-reading
Green Ink (www.greenink.co.uk)
DOI
https://doi.org/10.53324/SMVI1232