Teams at Tiné Hospital are receiving patients with severe wounds, burns, and trauma following intensified, increasingly frequent drone strikes.


Doctors Without Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) teams in 
Chad
 are treating repeated waves of mass casualties from intense, 
increasingly frequent drone strikes
 around neighboring Tina, 
Sudan
.


In recent weeks, residents have reported near-daily strikes by the Rapid Support Forces (RSF), one of the parties to the 
conflict in Sudan
, with as many as five or six occurring on some days. On May 24, a strike hit a busy cafeteria in the local market, resulting in the arrival of 35 wounded people in a single day. Three people were declared dead on arrival at the hospital, while several others reportedly died at the scene.


Since the beginning of May, 116 people wounded in strikes have been treated at Tiné Hospital.


Wounded patients travel hours to reach care


MSF provides medical care to patients at Tiné Hospital and, when necessary, organizes referrals to other medical facilities for the most severe cases.


“We are receiving patients after hours of travel, often in extremely difficult and critical condition,” said Issiaka Abdou, MSF head of mission in Chad. “The injuries we are treating are often extremely severe, including serious burns, blast-related trauma, and multiple injuries. We recently treated a child with severe burns to the face, arms, and legs. Every delay in [reaching care] reduces the chances of survival for the most critically injured patients.”




We recently treated a child with severe burns to the face, arms, and legs. Every delay in [reaching care] reduces the chances of survival for the most critically injured patients.




MSF medical teams are also observing a worrying shift in the profile of patients: “In recent days, we have seen more and more women and children among the wounded,” said Abdou. “On May 26, all patients we received following drone strikes were civilians. This shows just how exposed people living in this border area are to violence.”


“Health facilities in this region are operating in an extremely challenging environment, with high needs and limited resources,” said Cissé Boucari Hamadoum, MSF project coordinator in Tiné. “Despite these constraints, our teams continue to provide emergency medical care and respond to influxes of wounded patients in coordination with the Chadian health authorities.”


Civilians must be protected in war


Civilians should never pay the price of conflict. It is essential that communities are protected and that wounded people can access medical care quickly and safely.


Since the start of the 
war in Sudan in April 2023
, more than 900,000 Sudanese refugees have sought refuge in eastern Chad. In response to this crisis, MSF has expanded activities in the provinces of Sila, Wadi Fira, and Ouaddaï.


Our teams are also working in Adré, Ouré Cassoni, Iridimi, Touloum, and Aboutengué, as well as in surrounding villages in Ouaddaï province. We also work in Tiné, Wadi Fira province, providing emergency medical care and supporting health facilities that serve both refugee and host communities.


Tiné and Tina are adjacent border towns in Chad and Sudan, respectively.