Trump says he has someone in mind to succeed Graham but 'it's too soon' after his death to say
On that, 
Donald Trump
 said he has someone in mind for serving the remainder of Graham’s term in Congress.
“
I have somebody that I think would be great, but I don’t want to say it now because it just, you know, it’s too soon with Lindsey,
” Trump told NBC’s Meet the Press.
“
They’ll have some people joining. Some are good, some are bad
,” he said. “
I never thought I’d be in this position. I thought Lindsey was going to be living forever … He was going to win by a lot
.”
Share
Updated at 
11.52 EDT
Key events
GOP senator 
Roger Wicker
, of Mississippi, shared this tribute:


double quotation mark
There are no words to describe Lindsey Graham, my friend of more than three decades. 
There are no words to describe his impact on the foreign and domestic policy of the United States
. Lindsey served his beloved country in uniform and in the House and Senate. He stood solidly for freedom and strength and he fought for liberty across the globe. Lindsey Graham can be succeeded in office but he cannot be replaced.


Sharing his 
tribute
 on X, US Ambassador to the United Nations 
Mike Waltz
 recalled meeting 
Lindsey Graham
 when the late senator was a colonel in the Air National Guard.


double quotation mark
He insisted on spending his 3 weeks annual training in Afghanistan training Afghan Army JAG officers.


From Libya to Lebanon, no member of Congress traveled more to appreciate both the troops and bring ground truth back to legislating.


Most of all, he talked about helping the people of South Carolina and that our freedoms must be defended by projecting strength. Rest easy, Patriot.


US ambassador to Israel 
Mike Huckabee
 
said
 he was “still processing” Graham’s death and “reflecting on his life of service, his great sense of humor, and his love of Israel & the Jewish people.”


double quotation mark
He was here in Israel often. He understood the importance of the US/Israel partnership. He will be sorely missed.


Treasury secretary 
Scott Bessent
 
echoed
 that Graham “was a great American and Patriot”.


double quotation mark
He was a dedicated public servant who never stopped fighting for the Palmetto State and all Americans.


As a Senator he worked tirelessly for our country. It was an honor to call him my friend. And work with him to advance President Trump’s agenda at home and on the international stage.


Lindsey was a one-of-a-kind politician who could speak at length on both global defense policy and South Carolina kitchen table issues.
 He will be missed across our state, country and the entire globe.


My prayers are with his sister and extended family during this difficult time.


Acting attorney general 
Todd Blanche
 called 
Lindsey Graham
 “an American patriot who loved our country”. He 
wrote
 on X:


double quotation mark
He was a friend whose advice and humor was always appreciated. This is a devastating loss for America and the people of South Carolina, and our prayers are with his family, friends and Senate colleagues.


Democrat 
Jeanne Shaheen
 also called on Congress to pass 
Lindsey Graham
’s 
Russia sanctions bill
, which she said he had described as “one of his most consequential efforts”.
Shaneen, the ranking member on the Senate foreign relations committee, said in a statement:


double quotation mark
I am shocked and deeply saddened to learn of my friend senator Lindsey Graham’s sudden passing. Billy and I are keeping his loved ones, constituents and staff close in thought. Lindsey was a tireless advocate for America’s indispensable global role and 
had a particular focus on supporting Ukraine in the face of Russia’s unprovoked invasion
. Just days ago, we were at the Nato summit together, pushing toward this goal. On Friday, Senators Graham, Blumenthal, Wicker and I announced White House support for our Russia sanctions legislation to help finally achieve peace for Ukraine, which Lindsey described as one of his most consequential efforts. 
There can be no more fitting memorial to Lindsey, his legacy or the causes he fought for than to pass this legislation and realize his long-held dream of an independent and secure Ukraine.


Share
Updated at 
11.21 EDT
GOP representative 
Michael McCaul
 echoed others calling Graham a “giant” in the Senate, and called for Congress to approve 
fresh sanctions
 on 
Russia
 in his honor.


double quotation mark
This is a loss not only for his family and friends like me, but for the entire nation. We shared a similar world view that America is strongest at home when we are strong abroad. 
We worked together on many foreign policy issues, including the Russian sanctions bill. I am introducing the House version of that bill this week, and Congress should pass it in his honor.
 Above all, Lindsey was a friend and I will miss him very much.


Wyoming Republican 
John Barrasso
 said he was “deeply saddened” by the loss of his “dear friend”. He 
wrote
 on X:


double quotation mark
My prayers are with his family and all who loved him.


Lindsey represented South Carolina and America with pride and determination. He guided the Senate through our toughest battles while Chairman of both the Judiciary Committee and the Budget Committee. He carried the day with his mission clarity and steadfast leadership.


All of us in the Senate will miss his quick wit and infectious laughter. 
The Senate will never again see anyone quite like Senator Lindsey Graham.


Republican senator 
Tom Cotton
, of Arkansas, 
called
 
Lindsey Graham
 “an American original”.


double quotation mark
A truly self-made man, he lost his parents at an early age and cared for his younger sister. That same sense of responsibility and duty took him into the Air Force and the Congress. Lindsey was a great champion for our military, our troops, and our national security. 
A lover of liberty and a true patriot
, Lindsey never stopped working on behalf of South Carolina and America. His premature death is a tragedy for all those who knew him. Anna and I join all Arkansans in extending our deepest condolences to Lindsey’s family and friends.


GOP senator 
Lisa Murkowski
, of Alaska, 
wrote
 on X:


double quotation mark
Lindsey and I came into the Senate at the same time over two decades ago. Throughout that time he has been my friend and 
a true leader for our country
. 
It is hard to convey the loss that I feel knowing that we will no longer have his leadership in the Senate.
 Verne and I send our prayers to his family and all those who knew and loved him.


Share
Updated at 
10.56 EDT