19/06/2026 - 10:34
China’s UN envoy calls on Israel to stop violating Gaza ceasefire, Xinhua reports


China's permanent representative ​to the ​United Nations Fu Cong called on Israel to stop ​violating ‌a ⁠ceasefire in Gaza, state ‌media Xinhua reported.
Speaking ⁠at an emergency UN Security Council ​session on the humanitarian ‌situation in Gaza, Fu said China ‌views Israel's continual expansion of ​military occupation in Gaza with grave concern.
China calls on ​all parties concerned, ​particularly Israel, to ​fully comply with the ​ceasefire agreement and cease any reckless actions that violate it, according ⁠to the Xinhua report.






19/06/2026 - 10:26
Israel says it struck 'Hezbollah targets' in Lebanon's Beqaa Valley


Israel's military said it had struck Hezbollah targets in eastern Lebanon after four of its soldiers were killed in fighting with Shiite group Hezbollah.
"A short time ago, in response to repeated ceasefire violations by Hezbollah, which continues to prepare and carry out terrorist attacks against Israeli soldiers, the army struck Hezbollah infrastructure sites in the Beqaa Valley," the military said in a statement.






19/06/2026 - 09:28
Israeli air strikes on southern Lebanon kill at least 18 people after four Israeli soldiers killed


The number of people killed by Israeli strikes on ​southern Lebanon has risen to at least 18, Lebanon's health ministry said.
The ​Lebanese health ‌ministry said intensive airstrikes since midnight had hampered rescue ⁠and evacuation efforts, reporting a preliminary toll of 18 dead and 33 wounded that was expected to rise.
Residents and ‌Lebanese media said air strikes and shelling hit several towns in the Nabatieh ⁠district overnight and into early Friday, in what Lebanon's state news agency NNA described as one of the heaviest bombardments in recent weeks.
Israel ​said the strikes targeted what it described as Hezbollah operatives ‌and infrastructure across several areas of southern Lebanon and were carried out in response to repeated ceasefire violations by the Iran-backed group.
Hezbollah said its fighters ambushed an Israeli ‌force advancing near Ali al-Taher hill in southern Lebanon, destroying three Merkava tanks with guided missiles and targeting troops with ​rocket and artillery fire. The group said clashes were ongoing.






19/06/2026 - 09:14
Far-right Israeli minister says 'all of Lebanon must burn' after four soldiers killed fighting in country's south


Far-right Israeli National Security Minister Itamar Ben-Gvir said that "all of Lebanon must burn" after four Israeli soldiers allegedly advancing deeper into southern Lebanon were killed in clashes with Hezbollah.
"For every tear of an Israeli mother, a thousand Lebanese mothers must weep," he wrote on social media.






19/06/2026 - 09:00
No UN sanctions lifting on Iran without France's approval, foreign minister says


France will ​not approve ​the lifting of United Nations Security Council (UNSC) sanctions on Iran ​unless ‌it is ⁠satisfied that talks ‌on Tehran's nuclear programme meet its ⁠expectations, its foreign minister said.
Jean-Noël ​Barrot, whose ‌country is a veto-wielding member of the UNSC, ‌said there would be ​no stability in the region unless US talks with ​Iran resolved ​questions around Iran's ​ballistic missile programme and support ​for allied militias across the region.
"We need a radical change of posture by Iran," ⁠he said.






19/06/2026 - 08:45
US must put pressure on Israel to stop its hostilities in Lebanon, French Foreign Minister Barrot says


⁠Israel must ​stop its hostilities in ​Lebanon and the United States must put pressure ​on ‌Israel, French foreign ⁠minister Jean-Noël Barrot said.
Israel said on ⁠Thursday it would not rule out carrying ​out attacks beyond ‌a so-called military control zone covering swathes of southern Lebanon where Israeli troops continue to operate. 
Israel's ground invasion of Lebanon in response to Hezbollah rocket fire has killed thousands of people and driven more than a million more from their homes.
Barrot, ​speaking to French ​broadcaster franceinfo, said that France ​was still working to hold an international conference to mobilise support for ⁠the Lebanese army.






19/06/2026 - 08:35
Israeli military says four soldiers were killed in combat in southern Lebanon






19/06/2026 - 07:16
Israeli strikes on southern Lebanon kill at least 15 people, state news agency says


 Israeli ​strikes on southern Lebanon killed at least 15 people, state news agency NNA said, while Israel said the attacks launched overnight were aimed at what it described as Hezbollah ​targets ‌in several areas.
Residents and domestic media said ⁠Israeli air strikes and shelling hit several towns in the Nabatieh district overnight and ‌into early Friday, in a bombardment that NNA ⁠said was among the heaviest in recent weeks.
The Israeli military said it had struck what it alleged were Hezbollah militants and infrastructure at several ‌southern sites.
The escalation comes a day after Israel published ‌a map showing an expanded military control zone in southern Lebanon beyond which ​it said it would not rule out attacks, throwing Wednesday's US interim peace deal – which explicitly included an end to fighting in Lebanon – with Iran into doubt.






19/06/2026 - 07:07
Israeli military says it struck ‘Hezbollah targets’ across southern Lebanon overnight and is continuing attacks






19/06/2026 - 06:35
Switzerland says US-Iran talks planned for Friday are off


Talks ⁠that had ​been planned for ​Friday between the United States and Iran at ​the ‌Burgenstock mountaintop resort ⁠in Switzerland will not ‌take place, according to a ⁠Swiss foreign ministry statement.
The announcement came ​after a White ‌House spokesperson said overnight that US Vice President ‌JD Vance had pulled ​out of a planned trip to meet Iranian negotiators ​in Switzerland on Friday ​to begin ​talks on implementing an ​agreement struck between Tehran and Washington to end the war.






19/06/2026 - 04:31
Pentagon tells US lawmakers it needs $80 billion for Iran war and other bills, WSJ reports


The ⁠US ​Department of ​Defense needs $80 billion to cover costs ​from ‌the ⁠Iran war ‌as well as ⁠other non-war-related bills, Deputy Defense Secretary ​Stephen ‌Feinberg told lawmakers in phone calls ‌this week, ​the Wall Street Journal said on Thursday, ​citing people ​familiar ​with the matter.






19/06/2026 - 04:10
Hezbollah says destroyed Israeli tanks as Lebanon reports 3 killed


Hezbollah said on Friday its fighters destroyed three Israeli tanks and that clashes were ongoing, hours after Lebanese state media reported that Israeli strikes in the south killed three people.
The fighting came a day after the United States and Iran signed an agreement to end the Middle East war on all fronts, including in Lebanon. 
Hezbollah, an Iran-backed militant group, said on Friday that its fighters targeted "three Merkava tanks with guided missiles, which led to their destruction and setting them on fire".






19/06/2026 - 03:50
Trump envoy Witkoff says Iran will invite IAEA inspectors to visit nuclear sites


Trump envoy Steve Witkoff told members of Congress that Iran will invite the International Atomic Energy Agency to inspect its nuclear sites and begin work on identifying and uncovering the locations of Tehran’s enriched material, which is believed to be buried under rubble.
Witkoff's private briefing was described by two people familiar with the conversation who spoke to The Associated Press on condition of anonymity to share the closed-door details.
Witkoff told congressional leadership and members of national security-related committees that the agreement that the US struck with Iran did not include any side deals, but a side letter was drafted between Tehran and the IAEA extending the invitation.
Witkoff said the letter to IAEA Director-General Rafael Mariano Grossi would enable him to bring US nuclear inspectors to Tehran.






19/06/2026 - 03:34
Vance not flying Thursday night to Switzerland for Iran talks, says White House


US Vice President JD Vance has postponed a trip to Switzerland for talks that were originally slated for Friday to discuss next steps on the US-Iran agreement on ending the war in the Middle East, according to the White House.
"The logistics of these negotiations have never been simple or predictable. As of now the Vice President is not departing tonight," a White House spokesperson said late Thursday. "We look forward to beginning technical talks as soon as possible."






19/06/2026 - 03:21






19/06/2026 - 01:23
Senators seek to block Hegseth travel funds until Pentagon releases report on Iran school strike


Senators are seeking to block Defense Secretary Pete Hegseth's travel funds until the Pentagon submits several overdue reports to lawmakers, including its investigation into a deadly strike on an elementary school in Iran at the start of the US-Israeli war.
According to an annual defense authorization bill, filed this week, much of the travel funds for the defense secretary’s office may not be spent until Hegseth submits "unredacted civilian harm investigations," including for the Feb. 28, 2026, strike on the Minab school. Officials have preliminarily said the US was responsible for the strike, which was blamed on outdated intelligence.