Police in Hungary have said they will allow next month’s Pride parade in Budapest to take place, signalling a reversal from last year when they sought to block the event on the orders of the government of the rightwing former prime minister 
Viktor Orbán
.
Last year’s march made 
headlines around the world
 after Orbán’s Fidesz party backed 
legislation
 – the first of its kind in the EU’s recent history – that created a legal basis for Pride events to be banned, citing a widely criticised need to protect children.
Since Péter Magyar was elected as prime minister in a 
landslide victory
 last month, setting off celebrations across the country as Hungarians marked the end of Orbán’s 16 years in power, the new leader has repeatedly 
voiced support
 for equality and freedom of assembly.
Legislation by Viktor Orbán created a legal basis for Pride events to be banned.
 Photograph: Márton Mónus/Reuters
He has not, however, made any mention of 
Pride
 events, nor has his recently formed government moved to reverse Orbán’s legislation barring such events in the country, leaving questions swirling over the fate of this year’s events.
The organisers of Budapest Pride notified police this week of their intention to hold the 31st edition of the march on 27 June.
They said they had little doubt that the event would go ahead, particularly after the EU’s top court 
ruled that Orbán’s
 2021 anti-LGBTQ+ law – which was amended last year to serve as a basis for banning Pride – was discriminatory, stigmatising and in breach of the bloc’s rules.
“After the extraordinary year of 2025, we trust in the cooperation of the authorities and their acceptance of the gathering,” Budapest Pride organisers 
said in a statement
 this week. “We warmly welcome everyone in June who took part in last year’s demonstration, as well as those who continue to believe in equal rights and a democratic Hungary and those who would like to once again celebrate the transition to democracy.”
A record-breaking attendance made Budapest Pride 2025 a potent symbol of government defiance.
 Photograph: Lisa Leutner/Reuters
Police said they had given the march the green light to go ahead. In a statement to the news agency AFP, they said: “During the notification process for the 2026 Pride parade and the subsequent in-person consultation with the organisers, no grounds for prohibiting the assembly arose.”
The statement said police had issued “prescriptive-restrictive decisions regarding three counter-demonstrations”, suggesting that those gatherings would also be allowed to take place but at a distance from the Pride parade.
Despite the ban, last year’s march was attended by a record 200,000 people, according to its organisers, 
transforming
 the event into a potent symbol of 
defiance
 of Orbán and his government’s steady rollback of rights.
Orbán’s government had threatened to use facial recognition software to identify and potentially fine participants up to €500, but police later confirmed they would not take action against attenders.
Key to last year’s march was the progressive mayor of Budapest, Gergely Karácsony, who stepped in as a co-organiser, rebranding the event as a municipal cultural event in an attempt to sidestep Orbán’s legislation. Months later, 
he was charged
 with organising the banned parade, with prosecutors seeking to fine him.
Géza Buzás-Hábel, a Roma rights campaigner in Pécs, home to the only Pride march in Hungary outside the capital, 
also faces a fine
 for organising the fifth edition of the city’s parade last year.