Repeated Violence and Insecurity Continued to Affect the Functioning of Health Services in Cameroon in 2025


Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition (SHCC)


Using data collected by Insecurity Insight, the Safeguarding Health in Conflict Coalition (SHCC) identified 
30 incidents
of violence against or obstruction of health care in Cameroon in 2025. 18 health workers were kidnapped and nine arrested.


The report examines patterns of attacks affecting health workers, facilities, patients, and transport amid intensifying conflict between armed groups, and explores the consequences for access to health care, particularly in remote and conflict-affected regions. The report notes that the true scale of attacks is likely higher than documented due to underreporting in inaccessible areas and reduced humanitarian presence, including the impact of cuts to USAID funding on health service provision and monitoring.


The report forms part of SHCC's annual report
'Care in the Crosshairs'
.


Key findings:


For the second consecutive year, reported health worker kidnappings in Northwest region increased, with Ambazonian separatists and Bui Unity Warriors often named as perpetrators.


Gendarmerie forces in Northwest and Southwest regions continued to arrest health workers, accusing them of links to opposition groups. Health workers were mostly harmed while on their way to or from work, at home, or pursuing a private activity, highlighting how their vulnerability is heightened in their non-working lives within the community.


Lockdowns enforced by non-state armed groups and movement restrictions linked to armed clashes limited health workers’ and patients’ ability to travel to obtain health care and disrupted routine preventive health care activities. Insecurity, movement restrictions, and access constraints during lockdown periods forced humanitarian partners to suspend or adapt field operations, resulting in operational delays and reduced capacity to implement activities in certain areas and constraining the delivery of medical assistance.


Full report available in
 
English
 
and
 
French
.


Insecurity Insight updates data continuously and numbers may change if new information is made publicly available. For the latest available figures, see Insecurity Insight’s 
global map
 on attacks on health care since 2016.


Other resources


Drawing on a decade of systematically collected data, 
Still Under Attack
documents the scale, patterns, and consequences of attacks on health care in conflict-affected settings worldwide since the adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 2286 in 2016:


Based exclusively on Insecurity Insight’s data collection, it highlights how violence against health care is becoming normalised, with serious consequences for civilians, disease response and health systems.


The report provides detailed analysis of perpetrators, methods of attack and emerging risks, including the growing role of new technologies in conflict environments. It also offers recommendations for governments, international organisations, humanitarian actors and the diplomatic community aimed at strengthening the protection of health care and improving accountability for violations.


Published every two weeks, the 
Attacks on Health News Brief
 comprises threats and violence as well as protests and other events affecting the delivery of and access to health care around the world.