EXPLAINER
Iran war day 119: Israel hits Lebanon as IAEA says it will return to Iran
Israeli and Lebanese delegations will continue their talks on Friday.
Published On 26 Jun 2026
26 Jun 2026
Israel continues to 
attack southern Lebanon
 on Friday as Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu pledges that the Israeli military is “not going to withdraw” from occupied areas.
Israel currently occupies about one-fifth of Lebanon.
This comes amid progress on the interim peace accord between the United States and Iran aimed at ending the US-Israel war on Iran, which began on February 28.
Here is what is happening:
In Iran


IAEA chief says inspectors to return to Iran:
 The interim US-Iran peace accord – also being referred to as the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) – gives inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) access to Iran, the agency’s chief Rafael Grossi said, after Tehran indicated that key sites would remain off-limits until a final deal with Washington is reached and sanctions are lifted.


“There is an agreement and to comply with that agreement, the IAEA will have to have access and inspect,” the UN nuclear watchdog chief Grossi said at a news conference in Japan. “We hope to be there soon.”


UN halts escort of ships through Hormuz: 
The UN International Maritime Organization (IMO) paused its operation to escort ships through the Strait of Hormuz on Thursday after a vessel reported an attack, reigniting concerns about whether a preliminary deal to end the Iran war will hold. The cargo ship said it was hit close to Oman by a projectile, the British Navy agency UKMTO said.


On Thursday, Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) 
warned vessels not to attempt to pass
 the strait without its express permission, despite Oman and the IMO releasing details of a new safe route. In April, the IRGC released its own safe-transit route for approved ships, showing shipping lanes much closer to its own coast.


(Al Jazeera)
In the US


Trump says unfrozen Iranian assets will be used to buy US agricultural products: 
US President Donald Trump reiterated during an event for US farmers that 
unfrozen Iranian assets
 will be spent on buying wheat, soya beans and corn from the US. Iran has not confirmed this.


In Lebanon


Two killed in Israeli raid: 
Two people were killed and another person was wounded in an Israeli raid on the town of Mayfadoun, in southern Lebanon’s Nabatieh district, the National News Agency reported, citing the country’s Ministry of Public Health.


An Israeli air raid also hit the town of Nabatieh al-Fawqa, according to Al Jazeera Arabic.


Talks to continue: 
A US State Department official has told Al Jazeera Arabic that Israeli and Lebanese delegations will resume their meetings on Friday.


(Al Jazeera)
Global economy


India ends commercial gas restrictions: 
India has lifted restrictions on supplies of commercial liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) imposed during the war, when energy supplies were hit by the closure of the Strait of Hormuz, the global energy chokepoint.


Aramco resumes oil loading
: Saudi Aramco, the world’s largest oil company, has resumed oil loading at its Ras Tanura terminal in the Gulf after a nearly four-month halt, shipping data showed.