29/05/2026 - 11:07
'Europe stands united in the face of Russia's escalation', president of European Parliament says


"On behalf of the European Parliament, I want to express our complete solidarity with the people of Romania and with all those affected by the Russian drone that smashed into an apartment building in Galați this morning", said EP president Roberta Metsola. "Europe stands united in the face of Russia's escalation", she added.






29/05/2026 - 10:12
US ambassador to NATO condemns Russian drone incident


"We stand with our NATO ally Romania and condemn this reckless incursion on its territory.  Our thoughts are with the injured in Galati.  We will defend every inch of NATO territory", said US Ambassador Whitaker on X.






29/05/2026 - 10:01
Drone incident threatens Black Sea region, Ukraine FM says 


⁠A ⁠drone incursion ​into Romania ​during a Russian attack on Ukraine proves that Moscow's ​aggression poses ‌a ⁠threat to the Black ‌Sea region and the ⁠wider European continent, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Andrii ​Sybiha said. 
"Ukraine stands firmly by Romania. We ‌are ready to work closely ​together to strengthen protection from such threats," Sybiha said ​on X.
He ​added that strengthening ​Ukraine's air defence was ​a "strategic task" to protect not only Ukraine but also ⁠to reduce risks for neighbouring ⁠countries.






29/05/2026 - 09:59
Romanian president calls defence council meeting






29/05/2026 - 09:48
NATO ready to defend 'every inch' of its territory


NATO ⁠stands ready ​to defend every inch ​of its territory, the alliance's chief Mark Rutte said. 
"Russia's reckless ​behaviour is a ‌danger to us all," Rutte said in a post ‌on X. "Last night showed ​yet again that the implications of their illegal war of ​aggression don't stop at the ​border."
"We will ​continue to strengthen our deterrence ​and defence at home and continue our support for Ukraine as they defend against ⁠Russia's aggression," he added.






29/05/2026 - 09:40
NATO's Rutte vows 'absolute solidarity' with Romania






29/05/2026 - 09:35
Hungary PM condemns Russian drone incident in Romania


Hungary's Prime ​Minister Peter Magyar ​expressed solidarity with Romania and said ⁠the unity of Europe and the ​NATO alliance ‌were "more important today than ever."
Magyar also ‌said Hungary condemned "in ​the strongest possible terms" all attacks that endanger ​the civilian population ​and lead ​to the violation of ​the territory and airspace of a sovereign EU and ⁠NATO member state.






29/05/2026 - 09:34
Woman dies in Russia's Volgograd region after Ukrainian drone attack, TASS reports


A ​woman ​died in Russia's southern Volgograd region ​after ‌a ⁠Ukrainian ‌drone attack, TASS news ⁠agency reported, citing ​local authorities.
Earlier ‌on Friday Volgograd ‌governor Andrey ​Bocharov said that one person was killed ​and ​two ​were injured ​in an attack.






29/05/2026 - 09:23
'Russia has long ago stopped respecting borders', Kallas says 


⁠Moscow ⁠cannot be ​allowed to breach European ​airspace with impunity, Kaja Kallas, the European
Union's top diplomat ​said .
"The ​Russian drone crash ‌into apartments in Galați was a blatant and ‌serious violation of Romania's sovereignty ​and European airspace," Kallas said in a post on X. "Russia ​has long ago stopped ​respecting borders."
Kallas ​said she had spoken with ​Romanian Foreign Minister Oana Toiu to convey the EU's solidarity with Romania.






29/05/2026 - 08:47
Romania will not accept Russia's war to be transferred to Romanians, president says


⁠Romania will ​not accept that ​the war of aggression waged by Russia ​against ‌Ukraine ⁠be transferred to its citizens, President Nicusor Dan ⁠said. 
He added that he asked the foreign ​ministry to present without ​delay a ​series of measures ​regarding the country's relationship with Russia, "proportionate to this very serious situation".






29/05/2026 - 08:34
Romania summons Russian ambassador 


⁠Romania ​summoned ​Russia's ambassador, ​Foreign Minister ⁠Oana-Silvia ‌Toiu said, after ⁠a drone ​injured two ‌people in ‌a ​southeastern city during an overnight ​Russian ​attack ​on neighbouring ​Ukraine.
"We have confirmation from the Ministry of National Defence that the drone that crashed on a residential building in Galati is of Russian origin", said Toiu on X.






29/05/2026 - 08:32
France FM slams 'irresponsible act' after Russia drone hits Romania






29/05/2026 - 08:27
Poland's foreign minister says Russia "dangerous" after drone incident in Romania


Polish ​Foreign Minister Radoslaw ​Sikorski told Reuters on Friday ​that ‌Russia ⁠remained ‌a threat regardless of the ⁠circumstances surrounding a reported drone ​incident ‌in Romania, and expressed ‌solidarity with Bucharest.
"Regardless ​of whether it was on purpose ​or the ​result ​of ineptitude, Russia is ​still dangerous and we must defend ourselves ⁠against it," ⁠Sikorski ​said.






29/05/2026 - 08:27
French FM summons Russian ambassador over drone incident in Romania 


⁠French ​Foreign ​Minister Jean-Noël Barrot said on ​Friday ‌that ⁠he ‌had summoned Russia's ambassador ⁠after a Russian drone hit ‌an apartment building ‌in Romania and ​injured civilians during an overnight ​attack ​in neighbouring ​Ukraine.






29/05/2026 - 08:21
US anti-drone system 'operational' but too risky to use in city, Romania says 


The US ​anti-drone system Merops is ​operational in Romania, but would have been too risky to ​use ‌in ⁠a city, Romanian Brigadier General ‌Gheorghe Maxim said on Friday ⁠after a drone hit the roof ​of a block ‌of flats and caused an explosion.






29/05/2026 - 08:08
Moldova president says 'Russia is a danger to all' after 'grave' Romania drone strike


The president of Moldova, sandwiched between Ukraine and Romania, condemned a "grave" Russian drone strike that wounded two people in Romania.
"I strongly condemn Russian drones striking Romanians in their homes," Maia Sandu said on X. "This is grave. The Republic of Moldova stands in full solidarity with Romania and wishes a swift recovery to those injured in Galati. Russia is a danger to all and must be stopped."






29/05/2026 - 08:08
Russian drones attacked three foreign-flagged vessels, Ukraine's deputy PM says


Russian ⁠drones ​attacked three foreign-flagged ​merchant vessels late on Thursday ​and ‌overnight on ⁠Friday as ‌they were moving ⁠along Ukraine's export maritime corridor ​in the ‌Black Sea, Deputy Prime ‌Minister Oleksiy ​Kuleba said.
The strikes caused fires to break ​out on ​board the ​vessels, which were ​extinguished by the crews, Kuleba said ⁠on Telegram.






29/05/2026 - 08:03
Romania general says drone was in Romania for 4 minutes






29/05/2026 - 07:57
'Russia's war of aggression has crossed yet another line', von der Leyen says 


European ⁠Commission President ​Ursula von der ​Leyen said Russia had "crossed yet ​another
line" ‌after one ⁠of its drones ‌hit a densely populated ⁠area in Romania and injured civilians during ​an overnight attack ‌in neighbouring Ukraine.
"We stand in full solidarity ‌with Romania and ​its people," von der Leyen said in a post ​on X. "As we ​continue strengthening our ​security and deterrence, especially ​on our eastern border, we will keep increasing the pressure ⁠on Russia."