Nato announces plans to invest in antidrone, surveillance capabilities
Meanwhile over in Ankara, 
Nato
 keeps announcing new investments with hype videos set to dynamic 
stock
 music, including $40bn on antidrone capabilities.
Nato Secretary General Mark Rutte speaks during the Nato Defense Industry Forum at the NATO summit in Ankara, Turkey.
 Photograph: Hussein Malla/AP
The alliance will also purchase up to 10 Saab GlobalEye surveillance plans to replace its ageing fleet of AWACS early warning aircraft, Rutte said, choosing the Swedish company over US planemaker Boeing, Reuters reported.
Nato will also buy up to five ⁠Northrop Grumman MQ-4C ⁠Triton ​high altitude surveillance drones, with Norway, Finland, Germany and ⁠Denmark signing a letter of intent for the purchase.
The allies will also work together to acquire, store, transport, and manage stockpiles of critical defence materials, Rutte said.
Share
Updated at 
04.26 EDT
Key events
6m ago
Russia following Nato summit with 'great interest,' Kremlin spokesperson says
32m ago
'The hum of machinery must become a roar,' as Russia, China, North Korea 'increasingly working together' and 'do not have our best interests in mind,' Rutte warns
44m ago
Rutte speaks in Ankara as Nato two-day summit gets under way
1h ago
'Important work' at Nato summit with focus on drone deals, air defence, Zelenskyy says
2h ago
'I slept really well last night. And you?,' Belgian PM's cat mocks Trump after World Cup win, ahead of Nato summit
2h ago
At least 18 people injured in Damascus explosions near Macron's hotel
2h ago
Nato announces plans to invest in antidrone, surveillance capabilities
3h ago
Reports of explosions in Damascus, Syria, during France's Macron visit
3h ago
Europe faces up to prospect US may be unable to arm Nato allies
3h ago
Morning opening: Nato summit gets under way with focus on spending, capabilities
Russia following Nato summit with 'great interest,' Kremlin spokesperson says
Meanwhile, 
the Kremlin said it would closely monitor the Nato summit in Turkey, saying it remained of “great interest” to 
Russia
.
But Kremlin spokesperson 
Dmitry Peskov
 lamented that a series of “confrontational” statements about Russia had preceded the event, without really clarifying what he means by that.
The 
Nato
 event is now moving to panels with industry experts,
 so we will probably tune out for a bit, but you can continue watching our live stream below.
We are separately expecting to hear from Ukraine’s 
Volodymyr Zelenskyy
 fairly soon.
And 
we will soon need to move across to Paris for the major Le Pen ruling (
9:44
)
 which is expected to start in about an hour…
Turkey’s vice-president and defence minister 
Cevdet Yılmaz 
is speaking next, very much along the same lines.
He understandably also talks about the importance of Turkey in the process as “one of the defence exports around the globe,” saying “hopefully Turkey will be in the first league if we continue with the football analogy.”
Rutte
 comes back to his strained football analogy again, saying that the winning teams need to “prepare, train, invest, and build trust” and “that is exactly what we must continue to do.”


“The partnership between Nato and industry is the winning one. So now let’s deliver even more, even faster, and together.”


And he ends his speech here.
'The hum of machinery must become a roar,' as Russia, China, North Korea 'increasingly working together' and 'do not have our best interests in mind,' Rutte warns
Rutte
 continues with the football analogy talking about additional military production space in the alliance and comparing it to football pitches. No, me neither.
But 
he says that all this ramping up of production is significant
, and the alliance is making “real progress.”


“
The strategy is clear, but the match is far from over,
 and to win it, we need all team members to pull their weight, do more, faster, together. We do not have the luxury of time.”


He says
 
Russia
 is “pouring almost half of its national budget into its war machine,” 
while China “continues to modernise its armed forces and expand its nuclear capabilities without transparency,” and North Korea supporting Russia.


“We must remain vigilant. 
These countries are increasingly working together, and that should concern us all,
 because I assure you they do not have our best interests in mind.”


He says 
Nato needs “a transatlantic defence industrial revolution” to respond to that, and “the hum of machinery must become a roar.”


double quotation mark
“That sounds dramatic, but it can be done.”


He also says that Nato allies need to deregulate in procurement and work on cross-border solutions to move faster.
He also praises 
Ukraine
, saying they “continue to innovate at incredible speed,” including on “unparalleled drone ecosystem.”
He also pointedly pays tribute to other partner countries, including Japan.
Beginning with a 
unnaturally forced
 World Cup reference, Nato’s secretary general 
Rutte
 begins by saying that “no team wins because of one brilliant player.”


“We need a goalkeeper, you need the defenders, the midfielders, the strikers, and yes, everyone notices the player who scores the winning goal, but behind every successful player and team out on the pitch there are many others on the bench and behind the scenes the coaches, the trainers, the analysts, the people making sure everything works.


Everyone matters, no one wins alone. Nato is much the same
.”


He says you need political leaders to set the direction, and armed forces and defence industry to work hand in hand to be “fully engaged in the game, working together for our shared security.”
Unsuprisingly, he eventually concludes the teamwork at Nato is absolutely brilliant.


“This is a team that knows how to score.”


He then moves on to the summary of what Nato achieved in the last year, as it ramped up its defence spending after the previous summit in The Hague.
“The money is there, and much more is coming. But this cash must be put to work,” he says.
Rutte speaks in Ankara as Nato two-day summit gets under way
The opening speeches are now under way in Ankara,
 and you can watch them below.
This is the Day 1 industry event, not the leaders’ summit, mind you.
Nato secretary general Mark Rutte speaks at summit in Turkey – watch live
We are expecting Nato’s 
Mark Rutte
 to speak next.
Share
Updated at 
06.17 EDT
'Important work' at Nato summit with focus on drone deals, air defence, Zelenskyy says
Ukraine’s 
Volodymyr Zelenskyy
 has landed in Ankara, too.
Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy is welcomed by the Turkish culture minister Mehmet Nuri Ersoy at Esenboga Airport in Ankara, Turkey.
 Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images
In a post on X, 
he said “important work lies ahead” in the Turkish capital,
 as he hoped for “a strong and productive 
Nato
 summit.”


“
Decisions are needed now that will provide greater protection for our people
, more capabilities for our defence, and even stronger security cooperation between Ukraine, Europe, and the United States.”


Zelenskyy said he would attend “nearly twenty” bilateral meetings and sign “new drone deals,” with 
focus on bolstering Ukraine’s air defence amid continuing Russian attacks.
“New systems, missiles for them, and the issue of production licenses – all of this is our priority,” he said.
The 
Nato
 event in Ankara will pick up this afternoon when we are expecting to see – and hear from – more leaders as they arrive for their official dinner tonight, with the summit proper starting tomorrow.
Here are some of the arrivals this morning:
President of Finland Alexander Stubb is welcomed by the Turkish Minister of Family and Social Services Mahinur Özdemir Göktaş at Ankara Airport.
 Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images
Japanese defence minister Shinjiro Koizumi is welcomed by officials upon his arrival at Esenboga Airport.
 Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images
Greek foreign minister Giorgos Gerapetritis arrives at Ankara Airport.
 Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images
Canada’s 
Mark Carney
 arrived really early this morning, for example, and already met with Turkey’s president, 
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.
Canadian prime minister Mark Carney and Diana Fox Carney disembark a government plane in Ankara, Turkey.
 Photograph: Canadian Press/Shutterstock
They seem to be thrilled by each other’s company.
 Photograph: Murat Kula/PPO/Reuters
But for now, it’s mostly industry speeches and announcements on new arm deals to strengthen the alliance.
But we are expecting to hear from Nato’s secretary general 
Mark Rutte
 in the next half hour or so, and I will bring you the key lines from his speech.
'I slept really well last night. And you?,' Belgian PM's cat mocks Trump after World Cup win, ahead of Nato summit
in Brussels
And 
Maximus
 has spoken.
The official Instagram account of the Belgian prime minister’s cat has offered a typically oblique response to the national team’s
 triumph over the US
, following Donald Trump’s controversial intervention.
Maximus, the beloved cat of Belgian prime minister 
Bart De Wever,
 
was shown on Instagram lying on a rug holding a soft toy in the image of the US president
.


double quotation mark
“I slept really well last night. And you?’


reads the speech bubble in Dutch.
Maximus’ Instagram account is managed by De Wever’s team 
and often strays into political territory, with sardonic, albeit indirect comments on fellow politicians or events.
De Wever’s spokesperson on Monday declined to comment on Trump’s controversial and successful lobbying to overturn a red card given to US striker 
Falorin Balogun.
Instead local media were referred to another Maximus post, which offered a picture of the cat crouching by a red card: “Red card: I am going to play anyway!” read the speech bubble.
De Wever and Trump will both attend the 
Nato
 summit starting in Ankara later on Tuesday,
 although the Belgian leader will be on less comfortable ground. Belgium has pledged to meet Nato’s 5% of GDP defence spending target, but was forecast to meet the 2% spending target only in 2025 after years of delay.
Share
Updated at 
05.15 EDT
The Nato summit in Ankara comes amid somewhat tense relations between Europe and the US president, 
Donald Trump
.
Since the start of this year, when 
he threatened to take control of Greenland
 from Nato member Denmark
, Trump has continued to strain relations with US allies.
 He failed to consult European leaders before the US and Israel launched their economically disastrous attack on Iran, and then complained when they did not allow US jets to bomb Iran from their territory.
And, most recently, he has been involved in a personal spat with Italy’s 
Giorgia Meloni.
In the last few days, 
even 
the most fundamental issue of
 football became politically sensitive
 after 
a somewhat bizarre decision to overturn a red card for the USMNT’s Balogun
 ahead of their game versus Belgium last night, following a reported intervention by Trump.
US secretary of state 
Marco Rubio
 
joked yesterday
 that he could even bring it up with the Belgian delegation when they meet at the Nato summit in Ankara.
Well, 
I doubt he will be doing that now.
Let’s say that the Belgian national team thoroughly enjoyed their 4-1 win last night,
 with a specific barb against the president’s actions and mocking celebrations for the last goal.
Romelu Lukaku of Belgium celebrates scoring during the round of 16 match between the United States and Belgium at the 2026 FIFA World Cup at Seattle Stadium in Seattle, the United States.
 Photograph: Xinhua/Shutterstock
But, but, but
 that’s not the end of it, politically, as the most important resident of Belgium also weighed in on the result. And 
no, it’s not the king.
For more, let’s quickly go to 
Jennifer Rankin
, our Brussels correspondent.
At least 18 people injured in Damascus explosions near Macron's hotel
We are getting first reports from Damascus, saying at least 18 people, including four police officers, were injured in the explosions reported earlier.
One of the bombs was placed in a bin and the other in a vehicle near the Four Seasons Hotel where Macron spent the night, a Syrian security source told AFP, requesting anonymity.
Syrian police officers and emergency personnel gather near the Four Seasons Hotel following two explosions nearby in Damascus.
 Photograph: AFP/Getty Images
The explosions are the second since Thursday, when 10 people were killed in a bombing in a Damascus cafe.
The Élysée Palace confirmed earlier that 
Macron was safe and unaffected by the incident
 (
10:09
), and carried on with his programme.
French president Emmanuel Macron is greeted by Syrian president Ahmad al-Sharaa at the Presidential Palace in Damascus, Syria.
 Photograph: Mohamed Al Rifai/EPA
Share
Updated at 
05.05 EDT
Nato announces plans to invest in antidrone, surveillance capabilities
Meanwhile over in Ankara, 
Nato
 keeps announcing new investments with hype videos set to dynamic 
stock
 music, including $40bn on antidrone capabilities.
Nato Secretary General Mark Rutte speaks during the Nato Defense Industry Forum at the NATO summit in Ankara, Turkey.
 Photograph: Hussein Malla/AP
The alliance will also purchase up to 10 Saab GlobalEye surveillance plans to replace its ageing fleet of AWACS early warning aircraft, Rutte said, choosing the Swedish company over US planemaker Boeing, Reuters reported.
Nato will also buy up to five ⁠Northrop Grumman MQ-4C ⁠Triton ​high altitude surveillance drones, with Norway, Finland, Germany and ⁠Denmark signing a letter of intent for the purchase.
The allies will also work together to acquire, store, transport, and manage stockpiles of critical defence materials, Rutte said.
Share
Updated at 
04.26 EDT
Reports of explosions in Damascus, Syria, during France's Macron visit
I am also keeping an eye on reports of explosions in Damascus, Syria, shortly after the French president, 
Emmanuel Macron
, entered the presidential palace to meet Syrian president Ahmad al-Sharaa.
Emergency personnel work as smoke and fire rise at the site where explosive devices blew up near a hotel where French president Emmanuel Macron was meant to be staying, in Damascus, Syria.
 Photograph: Yamam Al Shaar/Reuters
The explosions reportedly happened near the Four Seasons Hotel, where it was reported that Macron spent the night.
But the Élysée Palace said Macron is safe and did not hear the explosions,
 as he was already out on his way for the meeting with al-Sharaa.
France's president Emmanuel Macron meets Syrian president Ahmed Al-Sharaa at the People's Palace in Damascus, Syria.
 Photograph: Mahmoud Hassano/Reuters
I will bring you more on this when we know more.
Europe faces up to prospect US may be unable to arm Nato allies
in Washington
There are growing concerns in Europe that the US defence industrial base is no longer providing the weapons pledged to Nato allies
 with US stockpiles depleted owing to the conflicts in 
Ukraine
 and Iran, leaving allies to consider new avenues to arm and defend themselves.
US president Donald Trump boards Air Force One en route to Turkey for the Nato Summit.
 Photograph: Win McNamee/Getty Images
As 
Nato leaders including the US president, Donald Trump, convene in Ankara
, Turkey, 
the US plans to address European defence spending and concerns over the Trump administration’s future commitment to the military alliance.
The US this year has delayed or cancelled deliveries of a series of key arms shipments to countries in 
Europe
,
 including Tomahawk cruise missiles, Himars mobile rocket artillery and desperately needed Patriot Advanced Capability-3 (PAC-3) missiles, of which the US used an estimated 50% through April of this year during its war with Iran.
They are crucial for countering the threat of missile strikes in Ukraine and would also be needed for the defence of Europe in case of an armed conflict with 
Russia
.
The shortages have also angered European capitals,
 which have quietly seethed while seeking to avoid direct conflicts with the Trump administration in order to prevent a broader collapse in transatlantic relations.
Morning opening: Nato summit gets under way with focus on spending, capabilities
Nato leaders, including the moody US president 
Donald Trump
, are set to meet in Ankara, Turkey today and tomorrow for the latest round of talks on transatlantic defence.
Preparations for the 36th Nato Heads of State and Government Summit, hosted by Turkey.
 Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images
As our defence and security editor 
Dan Sabbagh
 says, there has been “a remarkable effort behind the scenes at Trump-proofing whatever happens in Ankara” given his tendency to go into angry outbursts directed at the allies.
In one particularly amusing paragraph, Dan says that:


“
Trump is expected to bring 1,400 people with him to Turkey, including those responsible for bringing back his toilet waste
 – a standard protocol to prevent other countries analysing the material for intelligence about his health. That the US is coming in large numbers is seen as a relief, given that Trump has at times flirted with 
the idea of leaving Nato, including at a summit in 2018
.”


The day begins with the 
Nato
 Defence Industry Forum,
 a trade summit covering the latest round of announcements from the allies in new capabilities, including a strategic airlift of transport planes and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance machines.
Attendees arrive at the venue of the Nato Defence Industry Summit Forum in Ankara, Turkey.
 Photograph: Filip Singer/EPA
But the real drama will begin this afternoon
, as US president Trump and Ukraine’s 
Volodymyr Zelenskyy 
ahead of the summit.
We should hear from Zelenskyy later today, and see Trump when he arrives in Turkey
 and goes to the Turkish presidential palace for early talks before the formal dinner this evening.
BUT, BUT, BUT… we are also expecting a major development in France
, 
where
 
Marine Le Pen, France’s far-right figurehead and a leading contender for its presidency, will learn on Tuesday whether she can run in next year’s election
 when a Paris appeals court rules on her attempt to overturn a ban on holding elected office.
Last year, Le Pen was handed a five-year ban from public office and a four-year prison sentence,
 with two years suspended, for embezzling European parliament funds. Today we will learn about the outcome of her appeal.
As 
Jon Henley
 reports from Paris,


“
The ruling will determine whether the far-right National Rally (RN) candidate to succeed the outgoing president, Emmanuel Macron,
 will be the veteran Le Pen, 57, or her youthful protege, 
Jordan Bardella,
 30.”


The court is expected to start delivering the verdict early afternoon
 – around 1.30pm local time, so 12.30 London time – and it is likely to take some time before we get all the details. We will bring you all the latest here.
Journalists wait in a corridor ahead of a key verdict at Paris Court of appel.
 Photograph: Kenzo Tribouillard/AFP/Getty Images
Lots
 for us to cover today. Stay with us throughout the day.
It’s 
Tuesday, 7 July 2026
, it’s 
Jakub Krupa
 here, and this is 
Europe Live
.
Good morning.