Australia’s health watchdog has adopted a contested definition of antisemitism to guide its regulatory work.
The move has been welcomed by the nation’s peak Jewish body while the Australia Palestine Advocacy Network (Apan) has warned it could silence health professionals from criticising Israel’s human rights record.
In a 
joint statement 
with the federal government’s special envoy to combat antisemitism, Jillian Segal, the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) on Wednesday announced it had adopted the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance’s (IHRA) working definition of antisemitism for its “regulatory work.”
The 
IHRA definition
 says antisemitism is “a certain perception of Jews, which may be expressed as hatred toward Jews.” It is accompanied by illustrative examples, which opponents have argued means it can be used to conflate antisemitism with legitimate criticism of Israel.
Sign up for the Breaking News Australia email
The definition has been endorsed by the federal government and the antisemitism royal commission, launched in the wake of the Bondi terror attack last December, where 15 people were killed at a Hanukkah event.
Ahpra’s chief executive, Justin Untersteiner, said antisemitism costs lives and “has no place in healthcare.”
“Ahpra is committed to working with the Special Envoy and partners to eliminate antisemitism from the health system, because everyone should feel safe when accessing care,” he said in a statement.
“Ahpra has adopted the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (IHRA) definition of antisemitism as a reference tool, supported by the Special Envoy’s handbook to support a consistent understanding of antisemitism in its contemporary forms in our regulatory work.”
Apan on Thursday said Ahpra’s announcement risked healthcare workers facing suspensions or bans due to “egregious and vexatious complaints” that silence political expression about Israel’s actions in Gaza and Lebanon.
It pointed to healthcare workers since October 2023 reporting “fear of professional consequences for speaking publicly about Gaza and Palestine.”
“At the same time, Palestinian healthcare workers have witnessed the destruction of Gaza’s health system, the killing of thousands of healthcare workers and patients, and growing hostility towards those advocating for Palestinian human rights in Australia,” the statement said.
Last year Guardian Australia reported on claims by the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners that 
GPs had been subjected to frivolous or vexatious complaints 
to the health regulator about social media posts opposing Israel’s war in Gaza.
AHPRA is responsible for investigating complaints made about registered health professionals.
Untersteiner said Ahpra was always reviewing its vexatious notifications framework due to concerns about the “weaponisation of the notifications process”.
Ahpra is establishing an advisory panel of practitioners to improve the process and “strengthen safeguards”, the statement said.
A spokesperson for the peak Jewish body, the Executive Council of Australian Jewry (ECAJ) told Guardian Australia it welcomed Ahpra’s move. The ECAJ has previously endorsed the definition as a “practical, internationally-recognised tool to identify and combat antisemitism.”
Segal commended Ahpra’s move in adopting the definition. In her 2025 report to combat antisemitism, Segal argued all levels of government, public institutions and regulatory bodies should adopt the IHRA definition to provide a “unified framework” to monitor and respond to antisemitic incidents.
Last month, ABC and SBS confirmed they would not adopt the IHRA definition of antisemitism used by the 
royal commission
, arguing they needed to use their own definitions for editorial independence.
Reports of antisemitic, anti-Palestinian and Islamophobic incidents have been rising in Australia since Hamas’ 
attacks on 7 October 2023
. Hamas militants 
killed about 1,200 people and took 251 hostages
, prompting Israel’s military invasion of Gaza, in which more than 75,000 Palestinians are 
estimated to have been killed
.
An independent commission of inquiry set up by the United Nations last year 
labelled Israel’s war in Gaza a genocide
. Israel has “categorically rejected” the report.