Page 1 of 6 
 
     
 
 
  
Widespread destruction in North Gaza, where damage to infrastructure and basic services continues to 
affect displaced families. © June 2026 UNRWA Photo 
Highlights 
The Gaza Strip  
• Israeli forces continued high-intensity military activities west of the Yellow Line, conducting multi-
ple air and drone strikes targeting infrastructure, assets, and personnel suspected of links to the 
de facto authorities, with multiple civilian casualties reported. Israeli forces reportedly advanced 
across multiple areas, further shrinking humanitarian space across the Gaza Strip.   
• Multiple crossings experienced temporary closures following the escalation in regional tension, 
significantly slowing down the delivery of critical supplies into Gaza.  
• The WASH Cluster has developed a coordinated rodent control plan, implemented with support 
from UNDP, WHO, UNICEF, UNRWA and other partners, and in close coordination with the Ministry 
of Health. UNRWA contributes to joint risk assessment, coordination, and surveillance with WHO, 
 
[1] Some information reported may relate to periods outside the reporting timeframe. 
UNRWA Situation Report #225 on the Humanitarian Crisis in the Occupied Palestinian 
Territory (the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem)  
 
All information updated for 3 – 9 June 2026[1] 
 
                                                  Days 969-975 since the start of the war in the Gaza Strip  
                                                  Published on 11 June 2026
Page 2 of 6 
 
UNDP and the Ministry of Health, and implements targeted pest control in high-risk displacement 
sites and installations, large-scale waste removal, hygiene promotion and community outreach 
near its displacement sites.  
• Severe shortages of engine oil, tyres, and spare parts are placing life-saving humanitarian opera-
tions at risk across the Gaza Strip. Health services are particularly affected, as most facilities rely 
on generators that face frequent breakdowns. At the same time, water production, pumping and 
distribution systems — alongside wastewater and solid waste management — are at imminent 
risk of failure, as they depend almost entirely on ageing generators that are operating beyond de-
sign limits. Approximately 25 per cent of UNRWA vehicles — including water tankers and waste 
collection trucks — and 25 per cent of UNRWA generators are already out of service. Without ur-
gent resupply, disruptions to healthcare, safe water access, and waste collection are expected to 
rapidly escalate public health risks and operational constraints. 
1. Key points 
The Gaza Strip 
Fatalities and Injuries  
• Between 7 October 2023 and 7 June 2026, according to the Ministry of Health, as reported by 
Health Cluster, 72,980 Palestinians were killed in the Gaza Strip and another 173,171 injured. 
• UNRWA has recorded 392 colleagues killed in Gaza since the start of the war (310 UNRWA per-
sonnel, and 82 persons who were supporting UNRWA[2]), up to 8 June.  
 
Health crisis 
• Reported cases of acute watery diarrhoea (AWD) and acute bloody diarrhoea (ABD) increased 
during the current reporting week. This rise is likely associated with seasonal summer conditions, 
in addition to inadequate water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) conditions in affected communi-
ties. In contrast medical surveillance teams observed a slight decline in the number of reported 
cases of ectoparasitic skin diseases (like scabies). The decrease in reported cases may reflect 
the impact of the ongoing campaign for pest and rodent control, conducted by UNRWA and other 
WASH partners.   
 
Displacement, site management 
• UNRWA continues to monitor the movement of displaced persons and displacement sites. A total 
of 116 UNRWA collective emergency shelters host 76,000 internally displaced persons and are 
currently considered active[3].  
 
Operational implications and humanitarian response 
• Around 11,000 Palestinian UNRWA personnel continue to provide services and assistance to peo-
ple in Gaza. In the occupied West Bank, UNRWA also plays a central role with over 4,000 of the 
Agency’s Palestinian personnel providing education, health, and other services to Palestine Refu-
gees.  
• All UNRWA international staff are prevented from entering the Occupied Palestinian Territory - the 
Gaza Strip and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. This follows the implementation of laws 
passed by the Israeli parliament on 28 October 2024[4] that purport to prohibit UNRWA’s 
 
[2] Including 20 people killed while on duty. 
[3] This includes 82 collective emergency shelters managed by the Agency, where approximately 63,000 people are 
living. 
[4] The legislation came into effect on 29 January 2025.
Page 3 of 6 
 
operations in areas that Israel considers its sovereign territory, including occupied East Jerusa-
lem, and seek to bar any contact by Israeli officials with UNRWA. The Israeli authorities have not 
granted the Agency’s international staff visas or permits to enter the Occupied Palestinian Terri-
tory, including Gaza, since the end of January 2025.   
• Since March 2025, the Israeli authorities have been blocking UNRWA from directly bringing hu-
manitarian personnel and aid into the Gaza Strip. Despite the huge needs on the ground, UNRWA 
was therefore unable to distribute the aid it had pre-positioned outside Gaza, which included 
enough food parcels, flour, and shelter supplies for hundreds of thousands of people.   
 
The occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem 
• According to OCHA, between 7 October 2023 and 31 May 2026, 1,101 Palestinians – at least 240 
of them children – were killed in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Fifty-five of 
them have been killed since the beginning of 2026.  
• A Palestinian child was shot and killed by Israeli forces in Tel Rumeida area within Hebron on the 
evening of 5 June, with both parents of the child also injured when Israeli forces opened fire on 
their vehicle. The Israeli forces have reportedly opened an investigation into the incident.   
• Nine Palestinians were injured in the town of Huwara during an Israeli settler attack on 6 June, 
the latest in a spate of settler violence incidents across the West Bank. Arson incidents by Israeli 
settlers took place in Al Mughayyir, Abu Falah, Beitin, Idhna, and elsewhere.   
• Missile debris and interceptor shrapnel associated with the latest escalation in the Iran–Israel 
conflict landed in various areas of the occupied West Bank on 8 June, including Beit Jala and Su-
rif. 
2. Gaza humanitarian overview and response
Page 4 of 6 
 
Humanitarian access and armed conflict-related incidents[5]  
• From 2 to 8 June, two significant armed incidents impacted UNRWA facilities, personnel and per-
sons supporting UNRWA’s activities: 
o On 4 June 2026, an UNRWA employee was reportedly killed due to an Israeli forces air-
strike in Tal Al Hawa, South Gaza City.  
o On 8 June, an UNRWA employee was reportedly injured due to an Israeli forces’ airstrike 
in East Jabalia, North Gaza.   
• Since the beginning of the war and up to 18 May, 975* incidents impacting UNRWA premises and 
the people inside them have been reported. 312* (or nearly all) UNRWA installations have been 
impacted by armed conflict-related incidents, some of them multiple times. UNRWA continues to 
verify and update the number of casualties caused by these incidents.   
 
*Since the war began in October 2023, the latest casualty figures are continuously under review as 
UNRWA gains access to locations that were previously inaccessible and as further verifications occur. 
The summary figures will be published/updated as information becomes available, noting that these 
numbers are subject to change once verifications are concluded.   
UNRWA response  
Health and nutrition    
• UNRWA has provided over 18.6 million health visits, including 12.6 million medical consultations 
since the start of the war in the Gaza Strip in October 2023.   
• From 16 to 31 May, UNRWA screened 4,439 children aged between six and 59 months at its health 
centres and medical points, identifying 184 malnourished children.   
• By 7 June, six health centres and four additional UNRWA-rented facilities used as temporary 
health centres were operational in the Gaza Strip. In addition, by that date, UNRWA was providing 
primary health services through 75 mobile medical teams working in 28 medical points inside and 
outside collective emergency shelters in the Middle Area, Khan Younis, Al Mawasi and City[6].  
• From 1 to 7 June, an average of 1,035 UNRWA health personnel per day worked in the Agency’s 
health facilities across the Gaza Strip, providing 80,473 medical consultations in total.  
• Between 1 to 7 June, UNRWA health teams provided 8,106 consultations for post-natal and preg-
nant women at high risk, 3,147 dental and oral health consultations in fixed and mobile clinics, 
and 2,516 physiotherapy rehabilitation services sessions in health centres and medical points. A 
total of 13,648 laboratory tests were conducted in UNRWA health centres and medical points.  
• From 1 to 7 June, 2,811 vaccination sessions were provided at health centres and medical points. 
In addition, a total of 91 students received routine immunisations through school health services.  
• UNRWA’s telemedicine initiative began in March 2024 and has gradually expanded to include 
other services such as teledentistry, tele-physiotherapy, and telepsychosocial counselling. Cur-
rently, following the establishment of the Centralised Telemedicine Centre, the team provides tele-
consultations for curative outpatient care, non-communicable diseases, as well as maternal and 
cardiological consultations. 
 
 
 
 
 
[5] UNRWA is verifying details of incidents that reportedly impacted the Agency’s premises, assets, and/or personnel. 
Additional information will be provided once it becomes available.  
[6] The number of operational health facilities changes constantly based on demand, access and security. In particu-
lar, the number of medical points and teams in Gaza City continued to change due to heightened security risks and 
recurrent forced displacement orders.
Page 5 of 6 
 
Mental Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS)  
• UNRWA remains one of the largest providers of emergency learning and psychosocial support 
(PSS) services across the Gaza Strip.   
• Between 7 October 2023 and 8 June 2026, UNRWA’s social work team provided services to 
272,780 displaced persons, including psychological first aid, PSS services, family and individual 
activities, and case management. During the same reporting period, services were provided to 
4,167 survivors of gender-based violence (GBV) and 7,340 children, including 3,337 unaccompa-
nied children. The team supported 36,517 persons with disabilities with PSS. Awareness sessions 
on GBV , child protection, disability inclusion, as well as managing social and psychological stress-
ors, were conducted for 159,468 displaced persons.   
• UNRWA health teams, including 49 psychiatrists, psychosocial counsellors and supervisors, con-
tinued to provide MHPSS services in Gaza City, the Middle and Khan Younis areas, assisting spe-
cial cases referred from UNRWA health centres and collective emergency shelters. From 1 to 7 
June, UNRWA teams had 2,797 visits in health centres and at health points providing individual 
consultations, awareness sessions, and support for protection cases. 
 
Learning  
• UNRWA provides learning services in the Gaza Strip in Temporary Learning Spaces (TLS) and 
through its distance learning initiative.  
• Between 1 to 7 June, 59,901 children (26,633 boys and 33,268 girls), including 992 children with 
disabilities, took part in learning activities conducted across 681 classrooms in 78 UNRWA col-
lective emergency shelters[7] .  
• UNRWA also leverages digital tools to provide basic literacy and numeracy activities for over 
280,000 children in Gaza, facilitated by approximately 7,500 teachers using self-learning material 
developed by UNRWA that is hosted on the Agency’s digital learning platform.   
 
Food security   
• From 7 October 2023 until the start of the previous ceasefire on 19 January 2025, UNRWA 
reached over 388,000 families, or nearly 1.9 million people, with two rounds of flour deliveries; at 
least 374,000 of those families received three rounds. During that ceasefire, which lasted until 
March 2025, UNRWA reached over 2 million people with critical food assistance. 
• UNRWA ran out of food at the end of April 2025. The Agency has been blocked by the Israeli au-
thorities from directly bringing in any humanitarian assistance including food since 2 March 
2025. 
 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) 
• Since October 2023, UNRWA has carried out emergency WASH activities across the Gaza Strip, at 
UNRWA collective emergency shelters and informal displacement areas. Activities include operat-
ing and maintaining water wells and desalination systems, and supplying water by truck. In addi-
tion, UNRWA continues to maintain hygiene in its shelters and sites by distributing cleaning sup-
plies, running community-based solid waste management, water tank disinfection campaigns, 
and pest control.   
• In 2025, UNRWA distributed 970,000 cubic metres of drinking and domestic use water and col-
lected and disposed of 70,000 tonnes of solid waste. UNRWA estimates that around 1.7 million 
people benefitted from the Agency’s water provision and solid waste collection services in 2025.   
• Between 15 and 31 May, UNRWA distributed around 92,000 cubic metres of domestic and potable 
water in various areas and from different sources, reaching over 850,000 displaced people daily.   
 
[7] Since December 2025, the definition of UNRWA temporary learning space (TLS) has been updated to refer to one 
whole shelter, rather than one classroom, in alignment with the Education Cluster.
Page 6 of 6 
 
• Between 15 and 31 May, UNRWA teams collected around 4,300 tonnes of solid waste inside the 
Agency’s emergency shelters and surrounding areas. More than 1,000 cleaning campaigns were 
conducted, benefitting over 1,700,000 displaced persons. Activities included cleaning emergency 
shelters, cleaning and clearing 900 manholes, as well as water desludging. UNRWA teams also 
conducted over 4,800 hygiene promotion sessions over the same period. 
 
Quote from Ahlam, a 53-year-old Palestine Refugee from Gaza : 
“For me, embroidery is not just a profession; it is a memory we carry with us wherever we go. Every stitch 
tells part of our Palestinian story.” 
 
ENDs-