21/07/2026 - 05:10
Iran Guards say hit US military targets in Bahrain, Kuwait


Iran's Revolutionary Guards said on Tuesday they hit US military targets including air defence systems in Bahrain and Kuwait, state news agency IRNA reported.
The Guards said they struck two air defence systems and a radar installation at two different US outposts in Bahrain, as well as missile defence systems and radars and satellite reception systems in Kuwait.
"With this radar sweep, the enemy should prepare for even more decisive and powerful waves of drone and missile attacks," the Guards said in a statement carried by IRNA.
The announcement came as the United States said it struck Iranian military command centres, air defence systems and missile launch sites in overnight attacks.
Iran's army said it targeted "three major US bases in Kuwait" with kamikaze drones.






21/07/2026 - 05:06
US military says struck Iran military command centers, maritime capabilities


The US military said Monday night it had completed its latest round of strikes against Iran, targeting various sites to counter Tehran's ability to attack ships transiting the Strait of 
Hormuz
.
"US forces struck Iranian military command centers, maritime capabilities, missile and drone launch sites, and air defense systems to degrade Iran's ability to continue attacking commercial vessels flowing through the Strait of 
Hormuz
," CENTCOM said in a post on X.






21/07/2026 - 05:05
US military completes its latest strikes on Iran, marking the 10th successive night of attacks


The US military said late on Monday it ​finished its latest round of strikes on Iran, saying it hit Iranian military command centers, missile and drone launch sites, maritime capabilities and ​air ‌defense systems.
The US Central Command made the announcement ⁠in a post on social media website X.






21/07/2026 - 04:53
US issues 'worldwide caution' alert for citizens over Mideast tensions


The US State Department on Monday issued an alert urging American citizens around the world to "exercise increased caution" over the war with Iran.
The alert said that "due to heightened tensions in the Middle East, the security environment remains complex with the potential for unforeseen escalation."
"Americans outside the Middle East should reconsider travel to and through the region," it said, while warning of the heightened possibility of attacks targeting US diplomatic facilities "or at locations associated with the United States and Americans throughout the world."






21/07/2026 - 04:42
Lebanon's Aoun to meet Trump as pressure builds to disarm Hezbollah


Lebanese President Joseph Aoun is set to meet with his US counterpart Donald Trump in Washington on Tuesday, as pressure builds for Beirut to disarm Hezbollah, Israel's key condition before withdrawing from south Lebanon.
It comes a day after the United States, which has sponsored negotiations between Lebanon and Israel, announced the start of the implementation of an agreement granting the Lebanese army control over "pilot zones" in southern Lebanon.
These zones are primarily located just outside lands Israel occupied after Hezbollah drew Lebanon into the Middle East war in March.
Aoun, who has staunchly criticised Hezbollah's decision to pull Lebanon into war, is now hoping Trump will further pressure Israel to withdraw from occupied Lebanese lands.
Israel has nonetheless consistently refused to pull out as long as Hezbollah remains armed -- a demand echoed by Washington.






21/07/2026 - 00:45
Iran army says targeted US base in Kuwait


The Iranian army said early Tuesday it had targeted a US base in Kuwait with missiles, as President Masoud Pezeshkian said the conflict had morphed into a "full-scale war". 
"The army's ground forces targeted the HIMARS missile systems of the US terrorist army stationed at the Arifjan base in Kuwait with surface-to-surface missiles," state news agency IRNA said, quoting the army's public relations officials.
"HIMARS is a mobile missile system with the ability to move quickly against ground targets, which, when targeted, causes damage to the offensive and defensive layers and reduces the enemy's missile power in aggressive crimes," it said.
Camp Arifjan, located south of Kuwait City, accommodates elements of the US Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps and Coast Guard.






21/07/2026 - 00:20
UKMTO says tanker reports being struck by projectile in Strait of Hormuz


The ⁠United ​Kingdom Maritime ​Trade Operations agency said it had ​received ‌multiple ⁠reports that ‌a tanker had reported ⁠over VHF Channel 16 that ​it ‌had been struck by an unknown ‌projectile in ​the Strait of Hormuz.
UKMTO said the ​incident was ​reported ​8 nautical miles northeast ​of Oman's Limah and that authorities ⁠were investigating.






20/07/2026 - 23:56






20/07/2026 - 23:13
New strikes as Trump warns Iran will pay for US troop deaths


US President Donald Trump warned Iran on Monday that it would pay "many times over" for every American soldier killed as a top Iranian leader said the conflict has escalated into a "full-scale war."
As the United States announced a new round of strikes against the Islamic Republic, Tehran's Yemeni allies, the Houthi rebels, threatened to broaden the war even further by announcing they would blockade Saudi ports.
Such a move by the Houthis would put at risk Riyadh's ability to bypass the flashpoint Strait of Hormuz for some of its oil exports and have major repercussions on the global economy.