REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH SUB-WORKING GROUP
RHSWG 
In Lebanon, the Reproductive Health Sub-Working Group (RHSWG) was established in 2013 under the Health Sector. 
The Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) leads the RHSWG where the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) serves 
as the co-lead. The RHSWG members include national and international non-governmental organizations (NGOs), 
academics, relevant ministries, and UN agencies who coordinate to standardize and improve all aspects of sexual 
and reproductive health (SRH) programming such as community awareness, service quality, accessibility, and 
coverage. The RHSWG develops and follows up on the implementation of a yearly action plan that contributes to the 
objectives laid out in the Lebanese Response Plan (LRP). 
NEWSLETTER ISSUE #6 APR-JUN 2025
This issue highlights priority SRH needs identiﬁed and issues faced between April and June 2025
RHSWG Key Achievements Apr-Jun 2025 include:
Maternal and Neonatal Secondary Healthcare (Advocacy)
Following UNHCR's announcement in the last week of May on their plans to end their referral 
care support program on Nov 30, 2025. The RHSWG released an advocacy document on the 
implications of the cessation of UNHCR's referral care support for vulnerable women and 
newborns in Lebanon.
The brief highlights concerns about increased risk in maternal and neonatal mortality 
following UNHCR's exit due to ﬁnancial barriers to accessing hospital deliveries and 
neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) services. It ends with a call for action to mobilize 
further resources and leverage existing community midwifery projects  to ensure all 
vulnerable women access skilled healthcare professionals during delivery
Enhancing Referrals
In an effort to identify geographical gaps and improve referrals between health partners, the 
RHSWG completed two mapping exercises for projects supporting Community Midwifery 
interventions and ﬁnancial support for Neonatal and Pediatric Intensive Care Unit services 
(NICU/PICU) at hospitals.
NICU/PICU Support Mapping and Referral Matrix - July 2025 (Snapshot)
Community Midwifery Mapping & Referral Matrix - May 2025 (Snapshot)
Dashboard Updates
The RHSWG released the NICU Hospital Support 
Dashboard to reﬂect the status of hospitals providing 
subsidized Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) services 
and improve referrals. 
The RHSWG also updated the Support for Deliveries at 
Hospital Dashboard (June 10, 2025) to reﬂect the status 
of hospitals providing subsidized deliveries and identify 
gaps in service provision due to hostilities.
RHSWG NEWSLETTERRHSWG NEWSLETTER
NEWS ALERT!
Due to the signiﬁcant reduction in funding, UNHCR has been forced to take the diﬃcult decision of 
phasing out its secondary health care programme in Lebanon by the end of November 2025. After 
this date, refugees will no longer be covered by UNHCR including acute emergency, delivery, and 
NICU/PICU conditions. This development will have serious implications and underscores the urgent 
need to advocate with donors and partners to support access for essential hospital care after 
November 2025. 
Based on historical data from UNHCR in 2024, the RHSWG estimates a gap in direct medical cost of $6M for 
delivery support and $4.5M for NICU support. Without UNHCR support, approx. 28,000 vulnerable women 
and 3000 neonates will face ﬁnancial barriers to accessing safe hospital deliveries & NICU services 
increasing the risk of both maternal and neonatal mortality.
PUBLICATIONS 
UNFPA Launches State of World Population 2025 Report, 
"The Real Fertility Crisis"
UNFPA has released its 2025 State of World Population (SWOP) 
report, titled "The Real Fertility Crisis: The pursuit of reproductive 
agency in a changing world". The report reframes the global 
discourse on population, asserting that the true fertility crisis is 
not overpopulation or declining birth rates, but rather the 
widespread inability of individuals to achieve their own fertility 
goals. To mark World Population Day, UNFPA Lebanon launched 
on July 11 this ﬂagship report, with the presence of the Minister 
of Social Affairs, highlighting that shrinking families are a silent 
crisis stemming from a lack of genuine reproductive choice 
rather than a desire for fewer children.
To prevent avoidable maternal and neonatal mortality and morbidity, 
collaborative efforts are needed to mobilize resources for subsidized 
institutional deliveries and leverage existing community midwifery projects to 
ensure all vulnerable women access skilled healthcare professionals during 
delivery. The RHSWG continues to work with the Health Sector to determine 
the funds needed to target the most vulnerable women as of 2026 based on 
the updated PIN, standardized vulnerability criteria, and capacities available. 
UNFPA asked people – across 14 countries, which together 
represent more than a third of the global population – what they 
actually want for their reproductive lives and futures, and 
whether they believe they will be able to realize those ambitions.
The report reveals that a signiﬁcant number of women and men 
are unable to realize their reproductive aspirations. The primary 
barriers identiﬁed are systemic, including economic instability, 
gender discrimination, lack of support from partners and 
communities, and inadequate access to quality sexual and 
reproductive healthcare and services like affordable childcare. 
Launch of the SWOP 2025 report at LAU, 
Beirut - July 11, 2025
Left to Right: UNFPA Regional Director for Arab States 
Laila Baker, Lebanese Minister of Social Affairs Hanine 
El Sayyed, Oﬃcer in Charge
UN Resident/Humanitarian Coordinator Mathew 
Hollingworth, UNFPA Lebanon Representative 
Anandita Philipose
RHSWG NEWSLETTERRHSWG NEWSLETTER
Key stats on the identiﬁed barriers to choice are:
PUBLICATIONS -  cont.
PRIMARY HEALTHCARE - Service Utilization Trends
The health sector in Lebanon continues to deliver equitable quality healthcare services targeting 
vulnerable Lebanese and non-Lebanese individuals including displaced Syrians, Palestinian 
Refugees from Syria (PRS), Palestine Refugees in Lebanon (PRL), migrants, and displaced 
individuals of diverse nationalities. The health sector supports improved access to 
comprehensive primary healthcare which includes sexual and reproductive healthcare among 
other essential health and nutrition services.
# Subsidized ANC ConsultationsAnalysis: As of Q2 2025, there is a 28% increase in the 
number of subsidized Antenatal Care (ANC) consultations at 
Primary Healthcare Centers (PHCCs) across Lebanon 
compared  with the same period in 2024. However, there was 
a notable decrease in the month of June 2025 compared to 
May 2025. Main reasons include religious holidays in Q2 
(Adha/Ashoura) leading to facility closures and people 
deprioritizing healthcare visits. Further challenges for June 
included the decrease in the number of people coming to the 
PHCC given the security situation. 
Challenges reported by health partners include the unavailability of Midwives in remote areas in 
Akkar governorate and unavailability of Midwives and OBGYNs in border areas in Nabatieh/South 
governorates with many still not returned post-ceaseﬁre. 
Further support is needed to enhance SRH service provision across the country especially with some 
partners closing out projects as of Q3 2024. Newcomers from Syria in Akkar and Baalbak El Hermel 
continue to live in poor WaSH conditions at informal collective shelters which put women and girls at 
increased risk of UTIs and reproductive health tract infections. Health partners have also reported 
barriers to access that include legal status, transportation costs, and lack of awareness of available 
services, most importantly subsidized deliveries at hospitals. 
20% of reproductive-age adults believe they will be unable to 
have the number of children they desire
1 in 3 have unintended pregnancies
39% reported that ﬁnancial limitations had affected or would 
affect their ability to realize their desired family size
1 in 4 have felt unable to fulﬁl their desire for a child at their 
preferred time.
 
1 in 5 said fears about the future, such as climate change, 
environmental degradation, wars and pandemics, would lead or 
had led to them having fewer children than desired
In this video, UNFPA Lebanon asked people 
across generations about their fertility choices. 
Check out what they say! 
The report calls to foster "reproductive agency"— a person's ability to make free and informed 
choices about sex, contraception, and starting a family. This requires a policy shift away from 
demographic targets and toward creating an enabling environment that empowers individuals to 
realize their fundamental reproductive rights and choices
Source: Activity Info
RHSWG NEWSLETTERRHSWG NEWSLETTER
ACCESS TO MATERNAL CARE AT THE SECONDARY LEVEL
In Q2 2025, health partners continued to subsidize deliveries at 40 supported hospitals. Looking 
into the second half of 2025, signiﬁcant funding cuts are expected! Notably UNHCR's phasing out of 
its referral care program (Q4 2025), and the conclusion of the LHF 1st allocation and other 
emergency funds (Q3 2025). Accordingly, collaborative efforts are needed to mobilize resources for 
subsidized institutional deliveries (especially high risk pregnancy and the most vulnerable pregnant 
women) and leverage existing community midwifery projects to ensure all vulnerable women have 
access to family planning, antenatal care, safe delivery, and postnatal care services to prevent 
avoidable maternal and neonatal mortality and morbidity. 
SEXUAL VIOLENCE & CLINICAL MANAGEMENT OF RAPE SERVICES
Globally, 1 in 3 women are subjected to physical or sexual violence by an intimate partner or a 
non-partner (WHO). 
The Gender-Based Violence Information Managment System (GBV IMS) reports a simliar 
percentage for Rape and Sexual Assault incidents when compared to Q1 2025 (3% rape and 14% 
sexual assault). 
4/14 of MOPH CMR facilities have reported on cases for Q2 2025. The facilities are included in 
Nabatieh, Baalbek, Beirut, and Tripoli districts. 
There was zero reporting for the month of April. 
Key statistics include:
CMR Capacity Building Trainings under UNFPA
There continues to be a need to expand awareness of CMR services where the CMR TF continues to 
work with MOPH to enhance integration of CMR in awareness sessions at the community and PHCC 
levels. A training initiative that aimed to improve the response to sexual and gender-based violence 
(SGBV) by providing specialized Clinical Management of Rape (CMR) sensitization training to over 
1,200 professionals in Lebanon. The program is designed to create a coordinated and 
survivor-centered system of care. 
The training targets four key groups:
This video raises awareness on sexual assault and provides critical information on CMR service provision
 - Outlook into Q3 & Q4 2025
The MOPH PHENICS reports double the number of beneﬁciaries of CMR services when compared 
to Q1 2025. 
Approx. 64% (43% in 2024) of reported survivors receiving CMR services at CMR clinics are minors
Approx. 71% of reported survivors receiving CMR services at CMR clinics are female
More than 72% (57% in 2024) of reported survivors sought services at CMR facilities after 72 hours of 
the rape incident
All 14 CMR facilities (8 hospitals and 6 PHCCs) continue to be supported by health partners to 
offer free-of-charge CMR services to rape survivors of all nationalities. 
182 Mental health professionals
160 GBV actors
100 Hotline operators
812 staff of governmental hospitals
“The training didn’t just equip me individually; it contributed to a stronger, more 
informed network of psychologists. We are now better prepared, collectively, to offer 
critical, holistic support to every survivor who reaches out” - clinical psychologist
RHSWG NEWSLETTER
RHSWG NEWSLETTERPARTNER UPDATES
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) 
Donors: KOICA. ECHO, SIDA, CERF, France, OCHA, UNFPA Emergency Fund
 UNFPA coordinated closely with the MOPH, the Ministry of Social Affairs (MoSA), and local 
partners to adapt its response strategy to meet the emerging needs of the affected population 
and ensure continuity of essential SRH services at community, primary care and secondary care 
levels..
SERVICE DELIVERY
UNFPA’s support to 21 hospitals across Lebanon, 
included ﬁnancial coverage for childbirth costs 
which enhanced access to institutional based safe 
delivery for 550 pregnant women. UNFPA support 
included  access to emergency obstetric care for 
pregnant women experiencing complications.
UNFPA’s support to MOPH’s network of CMR 
facilities through procurement and prepositioning 
of essential medical supplies and medication 
allows survivors of rape access to lifesaving 
medical services. UNFPA’ support also included 
ﬁnancial coverage for CMR services at 3 CMR 
facilities.
Between April and June 2025, UNFPA supported 
access to SRH services and information to a total 
of 34,946 people in partnership with SIDC, 
Akkarouna, Caritas, Salama, Amel, Makassed, 
SWSL, LOM and Marsa in 53 PHCCs and medical 
mobile units that operate in various communities 
across Lebanon. These services targeted 
vulnerable groups, including Syrian refugees, 
internally displaced persons, people with 
disabilities, and the LGBTQI community. Support 
varied between comprehensive SRH services and 
Information.
SRH services and Information: Included pre-and postnatal care, menstrual management, sexually 
transmitted infections, family planning, and nutrition for pregnant and breastfeeding women etc UNFPA 
supported services includes medical consultation, midwifery care, subsidization of laboratory tests, 
sonography and RH tests, outreach awareness raising activities in addition to supporting referrals to 
specialized services as needed ( i.e mental health care etc).
Psychosocial support (PSS) and awareness on SRH: At the request of MOPH and in collaboration with 
the Social Worker Syndicate in Lebanon, UNFPA deployed social workers to provide PSS and awareness 
on SRH at 15 PHCCs across Lebanon reaching 2515 beneﬁciaries
Midwifery care and information on SRH: In partnership with LOM, UNFPA deployed midwives to provide 
midwifery care and awareness on SRH at 10 PHCCs across Lebanon. reaching 5509 beneﬁciaries with 
midwifery care services and information 
Learn more about UNFPA 
service delivery activities  by 
meeting health practitioners & 
social workers in two new 
virtual tours funded by
 KOICA
VIRTUAL TOURS
Medical Mobile Unit in 
partnership with MoSA 
& the Social Workers 
Syndicate in Lebanon
Primary Healthcare 
Center & Women & Girls 
Safe Space - CARITAS, 
Saida
Start the Tour
Start the Tour
1
2
RHSWG NEWSLETTER
RHSWG NEWSLETTER
UNFPA - cont.
NICU-PICU Support - UNICEF is supporting through Korea’s grant 11 hospitals with NICU and PICU 
cases. During the months of April-June 2025, 327 neonates and pediatrics were supported, with 
out-of-pocket payments, for them to access lifesaving services in NICU and PICU out of which 186 
were males and 141 were females.
Hayat Newborn Kit - 227 NICU patients in 11 hospitals received the Hayat Newborn Kit during Q2. 
The kit contains items to support the mother’s postpartum journey and the care for the baby. Items 
include: thermometer, scratch mittens, short sleeved and long-sleeved vests, clothes, condoms and 
diapers.
Procurement - Under BPRM and Australia, UNICEF procured NICU equipment and supplies to 
support 11 hospitals. These equipment include: Hayat New born Baby Boxes and BCPAP 
consumables.
UNICEF
Donors: Korea, BPRM, Australia
Saida, Lebanon — In the early morning, 21-year-old Ghoson, a displaced Syrian woman in her ﬁrst 
pregnancy, arrived at Saida Governmental Hospital in distress. Past her due date, with no documents 
and fearful for her baby’s safety, she faced an emergency situation. A fetal heart monitor revealed 
alarming signs: her baby was in distress, and an immediate C-section was required.
Thanks to support from IMC through an LHF-funded project, Ghoson was admitted and received full 
medical care — her only chance for a safe delivery.
A Legal Challenge: Without a marriage certiﬁcate, she wouldn’t be able to register her newborn — a 
barrier with long-term legal implications.
A Unique Solution: Recognizing the urgency, IMC staff coordinated with the hospital and a local 
marriage oﬃcer. Moved by her story, he came to the hospital and issued a new certiﬁcate, witnessed 
by the medical team.
Hope Restored: What began as a crisis became a moment of joy: Ghoson and her husband renewed 
their vows at the hospital, surrounded by smiles and support. She gave birth safely, and her baby was 
registered with dignity.
“For a brief, beautiful moment, love and life triumphed over war and loss.”
This story is a testament to IMC’s commitment — not only to saving lives, but to restoring dignity and 
hope.
A New Life, A New Beginning for Ghoson and Her Baby
CAPACITY BUILDING TRAININGS
A training program for 259 healthcare providers on obstetric emergencies, was conducted across 
17 government hospitals. The goal was to enhance the skills of doctors, nurses, and midwives in 
managing life-threatening situations during childbirth, such as postpartum hemorrhage, eclampsia, 
and obstructed labor. By equipping a signiﬁcant number of providers with the necessary 
knowledge and practical skills, the program aims to reduce maternal and neonatal morbidity and 
mortality rates.
International Medical Corps (IMC) - Lebanon Humanitarian Fund (LHF)
Ghoson's healthy newborn, delivered 
safely
RHSWG NEWSLETTER
RHSWG NEWSLETTER
At 23, Zainab, a Syrian woman displaced in Lebanon in 2024, faced signiﬁcant hardship in 
her ﬁrst pregnancy due to lack of income and inadequate access to healthcare and adequate 
nutrition.
During a community outreach visit, PUI midwife identiﬁed Zainab as severely malnourished, 
with a MUAC of just 18 cm, anemic, and suffering from a severe urinary tract infection and 
vaginitis — all while in the late stages of her ﬁrst pregnancy. PUI urgently referred Zainab to a 
specialized malnutrition treatment center, where she began receiving essential nutritional 
support and regular medical monitoring.
After enrolling in the program, Zeinab completed three antenatal care visits in Serepta PHCC 
and received continuous support from PUI, ensuring the health and well-being of both her 
and her baby. With time Zainab gradually improved and her pregnancy progressed smoothly, 
with both Zainab and her baby showing signs of good health. 
On May 28, 2025, Zainab safely delivered a healthy baby boy via C-section at Nabatieh 
Governmental Hospital. She attended her ﬁrst postnatal care visit on 5 June 2025 and is now 
successfully breastfeeding. Both mother and newborn are in good health.
"You gave me a chance when I was at my lowest. I am truly blessed. Thank you for giving me 
strength and support every step of the way,” said Zainab.
Zainab’s story powerfully shows how humanitarian support transforms lives. Without the 
timely intervention, her path could have taken a more diﬃcult turn. Thanks to funding from 
EU Humanitarian Aid, women like Zainab are receiving the vital care and assistance they 
deserve.
Premiere Urgence Internationale (PUI)
European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations (ECHO)
Meeting Urgent Maternal Health Needs Amid Displacement
A midwife conducting a postnatal assessment for Zainab during a PNC session at her home, South Lebanon, 
June 2025
RHSWG NEWSLETTER
RHSWG NEWSLETTER
Premier Urgence International (PUI)
ECHO Fund
Action Against Hunger (ACF) - Lebanon Humanitarian Fund (LHF)
ACF's LHF-funded program supported 255 high-risk pregnancies at four governmental hospitals 
(Baalbeck, Hermel, Saida, Nabatiyeh), offering antenatal, delivery, and postnatal care. 
Between January and April 2025, ACF conducted a patient exit survey to evaluate the 
hospitalization coverage program for high-risk pregnancies (HRP). ACF staff systematically 
contacted all discharged patients to gather feedback on their experiences and the quality of care 
received.
Key Findings:
● Access and Satisfaction: 54% rated antenatal care as excellent, 41% as good; 97% were satisfied 
with hospitalization and delivery services.
● People-Centered Care: 84% reported clear explanations from healthcare staff; 57% rated facility 
cleanliness as excellent; 86% felt respected; 84% felt supported.
● Barriers: Financial challenges were significant; 94% reported no additional payment requests; 96% 
faced no cultural barriers.
● Feedback: 67% felt confident in lodging complaints.
To further improve maternal health outcomes, the following recommendations were made:
● Ensure sustained funding for maternal health interventions.
● Expand financial assistance to include neonatal intensive care services.
● Upgrade health facility infrastructure to improve hygiene and patient comfort.
● Strengthen community outreach and health education initiatives.
● Enhance integrated maternal and child health services at the community and PHCC level.
● Invest in capacity building for hospital staff, focusing on both physical and emotional support.
● Continue monitoring patient feedback to inform and improve maternal and newborn health 
interventions.
Conclusion
The HRP Patient Exit Survey underscores the importance of equitable, high-quality healthcare 
services for pregnant women in Lebanon. By addressing the identiﬁed barriers and 
implementing the recommended actions, we can support better health outcomes for mothers 
and their infants, ultimately contributing to a healthier and more resilient community.
Improving Maternal Health: Insights from the ACF HRP Patient Exit Survey
Relief International (RI) - Lebanon Humanitarian Fun (LHF) 
 A Journey of Strength: A Mother’s Story from Arsal
A 35-year-old Lebanese mother of two from Arsal, with a background in nursing and over a 
decade of experience at a PHCC, found herself facing mounting ﬁnancial responsibilities. Her 
husband, who works as a volunteer with civil defense and a wedding photographer, doesn’t have 
a ﬁxed job. To support her household, she continued working as a nurse despite the challenges.
During her third pregnancy, in the ﬁrst trimester, unexpected complications emerged. While 
attending antenatal care at Al Iman PHCC, she suffered a stroke (DVT), and her blood pressure 
began to rise. Her gynecologist warned her that she would need to deliver in a hospital due to
RHSWG NEWSLETTER
RHSWG NEWSLETTER
Premier Urgence International (PUI)
ECHO Fund
Relief International (RI) - Cont.
the risks involved. At this point, overwhelmed by 
anxiety and ﬁnancial fears—thinking about 
surgery, tests, ICU care, and hospital admission 
without any medical insurance—she was 
introduced to Relief International. This moment 
marked a turning point.
“It really made the difference,” she shared.
Through their healthcare program for high-risk 
pregnancies, Relief International stepped in, covering the costs that her family could not 
manage. She received consistent medical follow-up and treatment. Under the MOPH coverage 
and Relief International contribution, she was admitted to Al Rayan Hospital in Baalbek, where 
she underwent a successful C-section. She gave birth to a healthy baby and received excellent 
care during her stay. She was discharged in good health, returning home safely with her newborn 
and husband. 
Two weeks later, she visited the PHCC for her postnatal care appointment, accompanied by her 
new baby for a routine follow-up.
“The support I received from Relief International came at the right time and made a signiﬁcant 
difference,” she repeated, highlighting the deep impact of the intervention.
Post natal care visit at Iman PHCC - Arsal,  where the 
mother received IYCF counseling from a Lactation 
Specialist deployed by Relief International (RI). 
To receive this newsletter, RHSWG announcements, and to join the working group please sign up here.
The RHSWG Google Drive Folder contains repositories of SRH guidance documents, RHSWG and CMR TF 
MoM, communication materials, service mapping, and other useful documents.
All 35 organizations mentioned are active members of the RHSWG: ACF, Al Makassed, AMEL, BASD, Caritas Lebanon, 
Gawth, Humedica, IMC, IOCC Lebanon, IOM, IRC, ICRC, Lebanese Order of Midwives (LOM), La Chaine De l'Espoir, LFPA, 
LRC, Mercy USA, MDM, MARSA, MEDAIR, MoPH, Makhzoumi, Order of Malta, Oxfam, Plan International, Proud 
Lebanon, PU-AMI, RI, SIDC, SALAMA, UNFPA, UNHCR, UNICEF, UNRWA, and WHO.
According to RHSWG SRH Service Mapping Exercise conducted in Q2 2025, the major donors supporting SRH 
interventions (by alphabetical order): AFD (France), BHA-USAID and BPRM (United States of America), BMZ-DHK 
(Germany), CERF, CDCS (The Crisis and Support Centre), EU-NDICI and ECHO (European Union), GAC (Canada), GFFO 
(Germany), Global Fund, IPPF, LHF, Monaco-Foundation Merieux, NORWAC, Private Funds, Republic of Korea, Swedish 
International Development Agency (SIDA) 
For more information, please contact Houssein Sweid, RHSWG Coordinator @UNFPA: sweid@unfpa.org 
GET INVOLVED
Photo: UNFPA Lebanon