Salesians ensure access to education and technical skills training.


NEW ROCHELLE, NY (June 20, 2026) 
Salesian Missions
, the U.S. development arm of the Salesians of Don Bosco, joins humanitarian organizations and the international community in honoring World Refugee Day, held each year on June 20 since 2001. The day, which is coordinated by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other international organizations, honors the plight of millions of refugees and internally displaced people who have been forced to flee their homes.


UNHCR estimates that by the middle of 2025, nearly 123 million people were forced to flee. UNHCR noted, “Brutal funding cuts compounded by growing anti-refugee sentiment are putting millions of lives at even greater risk. Critical support such as food, water, shelter and medicine has reduced or is on the verge of stopping all together.”


“Salesian missionaries provide humanitarian aid and social support for refugees and internally displaced persons whose lives have been affected by war, persecution, famine, and natural disasters,” said Father Michael Conway, director of Salesian Missions. “In addition to direct support of basic needs, Salesians ensure refugees and those displaced are able to access education and technical skills training so they can find employment in their new communities.”


To mark World Refugee Day 2026, Salesian Missions is proud to highlight programs around the globe that provide life-changing education and support for refugees and internally displaced people in need.


ITALY


Salesian missionaries with the Don Bosco 2000 Association in 
Italy
 are working to develop jobs for refugees through projects across the country. Recently, 15 jobs were made possible through the “My integrity” project that is supported by the AVSI Foundation, run by the Association of Volunteers for International Service, and financed with funds managed by the Presidency of the Council of Ministers.


The project includes a new social enterprise in Piazza Armerina, a commune in Sicily, which is being run at a confiscated property once owned by the mafia. Other projects where refugees are employed include the Museum of Legality and an aquaponics greenhouse in Villarosa, which are both assets confiscated from the mafia. In addition, the association runs Colonia Don Bosco to provide support for refugees.


Dr. Roberta La Cara, director of the research and development department of Don Bosco 2000 Association, said, “We hope to be able to give continuity to this path even beyond the conclusion of the project, strengthening the collaboration with AVSI and promoting together new initiatives to support the most vulnerable. The ‘My integrity’ project is a concrete step toward a more inclusive future, in which work becomes a tool for dignity and integration.”


LEBANON


Salesian missionaries are responding with aid and shelter for families that have been impacted by the conflict in the 
Middle East
. Lebanon* is facing a severe humanitarian crisis. Over 1 million people have been displaced, thousands have been killed and the population is becoming increasingly vulnerable. Salesian houses are supporting education, shelter, and psychological care for children and families.


Lucian, a 15-year-old Iraqi refugee who has been welcomed by Salesian missionaries, said, “The explosions are very intense. I can barely sleep at night, especially when the sirens go off.” Another youth Florina said, “We live each day in fear, wondering what will happen next.”


The conflict has interrupted education, limiting access to the internet, eliminating safe spaces for study and creating deep demotivation. One Salesian student said, “Sometimes I feel that all my efforts may be lost.” Many of these youth are already refugees who had fled previous conflicts. This current situation is reactivating or worsening past traumas.


Faced with widespread insecurity, Salesian centers have had to adapt. Centers such as Angels of Peace in Beirut suspended in-person classes and implemented daily online education systems, combined with psychosocial support. They are maintaining an educational routine as an essential tool to protect youth from the psychological impact of war.


“This digital classroom is the only refuge they have left,” explained a teacher. Centers have also strengthened emergency measures, including evacuation plans, crisis teams, daily security monitoring and communication systems with families. However, some centers have had to suspend educational activities entirely to provide shelter, leaving youth without schooling for weeks.


SOUTH SUDAN


More than 5,000 people, most of whom are internally displaced in Gumbo, on the outskirts of the city of Juba, 
South Sudan*
, had access to better nutrition during the first half of 2025. The food shipment was the result of a partnership between Salesian Missions and Rise Against Hunger.


At the Don Bosco Gumbo Camp, Rise Against Hunger meals, which consist of rice, soy, vegetables and a vitamin packet, were distributed to 2,958 people, ensuring that all the families received essential food supplies. Meals were also served at the Don Bosco School, benefiting more than 1,500 students in the regular morning classes and more than 500 in the accelerated learning program in the afternoon. The meals served during their break provided much-needed nourishment to support their learning and well-being.


In Tonj, 180 people who are affected by leprosy also received meals. This outreach emphasized inclusivity and compassion, reaching one of the most marginalized groups in society. Additionally, meals were distributed to refugees in Wau, reinforcing efforts to support displaced communities and uphold their dignity through food assistance.


UKRAINE


Salesian missionaries working and living in several locations in Ukraine* were provided emergency support for the winter thanks to donor funding from Salesian Missions. Salesian centers in Korostiv, Skhidnytsia, Dnipro, Vynnyky, Kyiv and Lviv were impacted by this donation. In addition, the emergency support impacted 650 students at the Salesian schools in Lviv and 20 displaced persons in Vynnyky.


The Salesian centers are experiencing frequent power outages and this is particularly difficult in the winter because of the lack of heat. The project allowed for the purchase and installation of four generators, which have ensured that facilities continue to function, especially the schools, where uninterrupted education was guaranteed. The funding also supported the purchase of diesel fuel for the generators. The generators provide both alternative lighting and heating.


In one of the facilities, an old boiler was repaired and elements of the heating system were replaced. In addition, the hot water system was repaired at the Salesian center in Vynnyky, ensuring proper heating and sanitation.


Father Mykhaylo Chaban, superior of the Salesian Mary Help of Christians Vice-Province of the Greek-Catholic Rite in Ukraine, explained, “The funding gave us hope and support to endure all the challenges we face during wartime, especially in the cold winter. With your help, we have light and warmth for living, uninterrupted training and working processes.”


*Any goods, services, or funds provided by Salesian Missions to programs located in these countries were administered in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, including sanctions administered by the U.S. Department of Treasury’s Office of Foreign Asset Control.


###


About Salesian Missions

Salesian Missions is headquartered in New Rochelle, NY, and is part of the Don Bosco Network—a worldwide federation of Salesian NGOs. The mission of the U.S.-based nonprofit Catholic organization is to raise funds for international programs that serve youth and families in poor communities around the globe. The Salesian missionaries are made up of priests, brothers and sisters, as well as laypeople—all dedicated to caring for poor children throughout the world in more than 130 countries and helping young people become self-sufficient by learning a trade that will help them gain employment. To date, more than 3 million youth have received services funded by Salesian Missions. These services and programs are provided to children regardless of race or religion. For more information, go to 
SalesianMissions.org
.