Situation Report No. 17
Earthquakes in Venezuela
10 July 2026
Time: 9:00 pm


Highlights


Following the 24 June earthquakes of magnitude 7.2 and 7.5 (18:00 local time), 
authorities report more than 1,100 aftershocks.


Official toll: 
4,118 people dead and 16,740 injured.


A total of 
6,462 people have been rescued.


Tom Fletcher, the United Nation’s humanitarian chief, concluded his four-day visit to the country and called for sustained international support for the Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP).


An additional appeal for US$298 million was launched to scale up the earthquake response and address the multisectoral needs of 1.3 million people over the next six months.


The United Nations system and its partner organizations, in coordination with the Government, are responding with multisectoral actions and will continue to scale up assistance to affected people.


Situation overview


Venezuela is facing a national emergency following two consecutive high-magnitude earthquakes (7.2 and 7.5) that struck on 24 June (18:00 local time) in the north-central region, with the epicentre located along the San Felipe–Yumare–Montalbán axis (Yaracuy/Carabobo). 
Authorities report 1,171 aftershocks.


Authorities report a toll of 
4,118 people dead, 16,740 injured, and 6,462 rescued
 since the onset of the emergency. Authorities also reported that approximately 
17,907 people lost their homes.


The Government response remains focused on search and rescue operations, the preparation and expansion of transitional camps and assistance to affected populations. The United Nations and its partner organizations, in coordination with the authorities, are implementing multisectoral response activities and will continue to scale up assistance to affected people. The United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Tom Fletcher, concluded his four-day visit to Venezuela on Friday and called on the international community to maintain its support for the Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP) to help address the most urgent needs of people in vulnerable situations.






Disclaimer




UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs


To learn more about OCHA's activities, please visit https://www.unocha.org/.