NATO jets shoot down drone over Latvia, extending Ukraine spillover fears
The drone entered Latvian airspace due to ‘Russian electronic warfare’, the military says.
Published On 8 Jun 2026
8 Jun 2026
NATO fighters have scrambled to shoot down a drone that entered Latvian airspace from Russia.
The Latvian military said on Monday that French aircraft had destroyed “a foreign unmanned aerial vehicle that had entered Latvian airspace as a result of Russian electronic warfare”, without saying where the drone originated.
Recommended Stories 
list of 4 items
end of list
The incident adds a growing list of incursions from the Russia-Ukraine war into neighbouring countries that are part of the NATO alliance, sparking fears of escalating spillover effects as Moscow’s siege on Ukraine continues apace.
“Thank you to our French allies for shooting down the drone that penetrated Latvian airspace!” Riga’s Foreign Minister Baiba Braze wrote on social media.
Latvian Prime Minister Andris Kulbergs heralded the “swift decision-making and professional action”.
Defence Minister Raivis Melnis told reporters the drone was shot down just after 9am local time (07:00 GMT) near the village of Berzgale, located about 30km (18 miles) from the Russian border. No one was hurt, and no property was damaged, Melnis said.
The French military said in a statement that the jets took off from Siauliai airbase in northern Lithuania and destroyed the drone “over an uninhabited area”.
It added that the incident demonstrated France’s “commitment to contributing to the security of Europe’s eastern flank”.
Authorities had previously warned residents in some parts of eastern Latvia to shelter in place because of the threat.
Ongoing threat
Countries in the region have reported 
repeated drone incursions
 from air and sea in recent months, spawning concerns over the widening impact of Russia’s war on Ukraine.
The issue has raised the political pressure in Latvia, leading to 
the resignation
 of Prime Minister Evika Silina last month.
The increased frequency of the reports comes as Ukraine has increased its attacks on Russia, with Moscow deflecting drones using electronic jamming. The statement from the Latvian military regarding “Russian electronic warfare” appears to suggest the drone shot down likely came from Ukraine.
Fragments of a Ukrainian drone were also found in a field in Moldova on Monday after it entered from Ukraine, an incident that officials also blamed on Moscow.
Last week, a maritime drone 
exploded
 in Romania’s Constanta port. Kyiv later confirmed it involved a Ukrainian drone that was knocked off course by Russian electronic interference.
However, it was a Russian drone that 
hit
 an apartment building in eastern Romania in late May, injuring two people and prompting Bucharest to call for NATO to speed up the transfer of anti-drone capabilities.
European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen warned after that crash that Russia’s war on Ukraine is “increasingly becoming a direct threat to countries on our Eastern border” and said solidarity with them was “absolute”.
The French military jet that shot down Monday’s drone is part of the NATO Baltic Air Policing mission, which has patrolled the skies of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia since they became part of NATO in 2004.