Russia Intensifies Strikes and Bluster as War Against Ukraine Falters 


Executive Summary:




Russia’s targeting of prominent Ukrainian cultural heritage sites during a massive overnight attack on June 15 may indicate the beginning of a more brazen strike campaign against symbols of Ukrainian identity. Moscow’s simultaneous targeting of cultural sites and civilian infrastructure is designed to break Ukrainian morale. 


The Kremlin has paired massive strike campaigns with increasingly aggressive rhetoric and shows of force aimed at Ukraine’s Western partners. This fits Russia’s broader strategy of forcing Ukraine to accept an unfavorable peace settlement by undermining Western support. 


Russian President Vladimir Putin may choose to escalate militarily, either inside or outside of Ukraine, in an attempt to restore his reputation as the leader of a powerful country that cannot lose. 






In a massive overnight attack on June 15, the Russian military struck the Kyiv–Pechersk Lavra in Ukraine’s capital with a Shahed-type drone. The Lavra, built nearly 1,000 years ago, houses irreplaceable cultural relics and icons, and is considered perhaps the holiest place in Ukraine (
Kyiv Independent
, June 15). While firefighters minimized damage at the Lavra, the attack heavily damaged or destroyed other prominent cultural heritage sites in Dnipro, Kharkiv, and Kyiv (
Facebook/Nova Ukraine
, June 15).


Moscow’s targeting of beloved cultural sites across Ukraine is part of a multifaceted effort to both destroy Ukrainian morale and Western cohesion during a critical point in its full-scale war against Ukraine. Through escalated violence, rhetoric, and threats, the Kremlin aims to pressure Ukraine and partners into a less-than-satisfactory peace deal, even though Russia’s economic, military, and political situation is significantly worsening (see 
Strategic Snapshot
, June 26; see EDM 
June 4
, 
June 25
. In reality, this approach has thus far only hardened resolve against Moscow’s aggression, making Russian President Vladimir Putin’s position increasingly untenable and desperate as his war drags on. 


Ukraine finds itself in its best battlefield position since its dramatic counterattacks in 2022 (see 
Jamestown Perspectives
, June 13). Its drone innovation, facilitated through its young “service elite,” has outpaced Russia’s throughout 2026 (Author’s Interview with Robert Potter, April 22, 2026). [1] On the back of superior military technology, the Armed Forces of Ukraine (AFU) have outperformed their Russian counterparts in recent months. The AFU has blunted Russia’s westward advance and has even reversed gains in certain areas, especially in the southern theater (see 
Kyiv Post,
 June 24; 
Ukrainska Pravda
, June 8). The casualty ratio between Ukrainian and Russian soldiers has climbed to 1:10; the AFU hopes to exceed 1:20 by the end of the year. With Western military aid mattering less in this new age of drone warfare, the AFU can now fight more sustainably and consistently with homegrown weapons (see 
Jamestown Perspectives
, June 13). 


Behind the frontline, drone innovation has quadrupled the number of successful mid-range attacks on key logistical sites in the first half of 2026. Increased hits on fuel trucks and military equipment not only hindered Russian military operations but also led to severe civilian fuel shortages (see 
EDM
 June 9; see 
Jamestown Perspectives
, June 13). At the same time, Ukraine’s burgeoning long-range strike capability has resulted in a doubling of hits on Russian oil refineries compared to last year (
Kyiv Independent
, May 20; see 
Jamestown Perspectives
, June 13). Ukrainian-made flamingo cruise missiles and strike drones threaten Russian cities, industrial centers, energy infrastructure, and 70 percent of Russia’s population (see 
EDM
, June 3). Thus far, Russia has been unable to counter these strikes effectively.


Ukraine’s battlefield success has bolstered its global standing as a defense exporter. Gulf countries sought Ukrainian drone expertise and cutting-edge military technology after the outbreak of the Iran conflict. In addition to deploying experts to the region, Ukraine has now signed defense agreements with Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates, and other regional actors are showing interest (see 
EDM
 April 1; 
Ukrinform
, April 19). Ukraine has transformed into a key player in global defense policy. 


Facing compounding setbacks, Putin and his propagandists hope to break Ukrainian morale through escalated, audacious attacks on civilian targets in Ukrainian cities. Russia launched a record 8,150 drones and 210 missiles in May (
Telegram/@smolii_ukraine
, May 31; see 
Jamestown Perspectives
, June 13). Russian milbloggers now call for strikes “that will make Kyiv uninhabitable,” and even “turn the enemy’s strongholds into dust” with nuclear weapons (
Telegram/@Скурлатов live
, May 25; 
Telegram/@fighterbomber
, June 16). Calls for escalation reflect the Russian ultranationalist belief that force can still break Ukrainian society, but also their growing sense of desperation as Ukraine gains momentum. 


The Kremlin now depends on brazen attacks to undermine Ukrainian morale. Moscow’s simultaneous escalated rhetoric and brinksmanship, however, seek to undermine Western partners’ support for Ukraine, as well as their internal cohesion. In late May, the Russian Foreign Ministry publicly called on foreign nationals to evacuate Kyiv ahead of a new campaign of “systematic strikes on decision-making centers.” Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov even called U.S. Secretary of State Marco Rubio with a personal warning to U.S. diplomatic staff in Kyiv (
Vedmosti.ru
; see 
EDM
, June 1). Fears rose that Russia was about to bomb the Office of the President and other key political sites once assumed to be off limits (
X/@ZelenskyyUa
, May 15). Despite these concerns, no Western country evacuated its staff. The attack that followed, while serious, did not exceed the intensity of previous strikes on Kyiv. So far, Russian bluster, including repeated launches of nuclear-capable Sarmat and Oreshnik ballistic missiles, has not achieved its intended effect (see EDM, 
May 26
, 
June 1
).


An increasingly desperate Putin may be using this bluster as a smokescreen to prepare an expansion of his war, either inside or outside of Ukraine. Belarus–Russia cooperation has deepened in recent months. New Russian military facilities on Belarusian soil, joint strategic exercises, and the number of drones launched from Belarus into Ukraine have all increased (see 
EDM
, June 4). The AFU is taking the threat of a new offensive from Ukraine’s north seriously. The Unmanned Systems Forces publicly stated that they have developed 500 initial targets in Belarus should this escalation happen (
Ukrainska Pravda
, May 26). The anti-drone netting that famously protects Ukrainian roadways in frontline areas can now be found in Ukraine’s Volyn oblast, hundreds of miles from eastern Kharkiv, Kherson, or the Donbas (
Ukrainian News
, June 10). These preparations indicate that some kind of escalation from Ukraine’s northern neighbor is within the realm of possibility. 


Western officials also worry that the Kremlin may be planning a new military venture against the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s (NATO) eastern flank. Russian military officials and ultranationalist Z-bloggers now publicly question NATO’s commitment to defending the Baltic states. On May 19, Vasiliy Nebenza, Russia’s permanent representative to the United Nations, explicitly told his Latvian counterpart during a Security Council meeting that “NATO membership will not protect you” in the event of a Russian attack (see 
EDM
, June 9). Other developments, such as Russia’s construction of a large military base near the border with Finland, suggest that Putin may spark new conflicts outside of Ukraine in an attempt to restore his image as a strongman who never loses (
Ukrainska Pravda
, June 11; see 
EDM
, June 9).


Putin finds himself in an untenable position. His inability to make battlefield gains, ameliorate economic strain, and stop Ukrainian strikes on Russian territory—including highly visible ones near St. Petersburg, Moscow, and other population centers—builds pressure inside the Kremlin and invites public resentment, if not outrage (see EDM, March 
16
, 
19
, 
April 23
). Additional repressive measures Putin has introduced to preserve the status quo, especially the banning of Telegram and prominent global internet platforms, negatively impact ordinary Russians’ lives, further driving discontent (see 
Strategic Snapshot
, May 8). Putin may resort to more extreme and dangerous measures to bring his faltering war to a close in his favor. 


Note:


[1] According to Robert Potter, founder of the Kyiv-based Cyber Activities Group, Ukraine’s service is a new generation of Ukrainian leaders who have emerged from war and are gradually replacing the country’s older, post-Soviet leadership. He claims they are patriotic, forward-thinking, and individually brave (Author’s interview, April 22).