Brussels - Demonstrating its steadfast commitment to global progress, the Government of Luxembourg has delivered a contribution of EUR 3.1 million to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), bolstering core and flexible resources to drive sustainable development and crisis response worldwide.


The contribution represents the first instalment for 2026 under the 2026–2029 Strategic Partnership Framework 
signed
 on 25 September 2025 for a total amount of EUR 25.4 million (US$29.81 million). Of the EUR 3.1 million contribution, EUR 2 million is allocated to UNDP’s core resources—the vital, unearmarked funding that enables rapid, effective responses to complex and emerging crises. The remaining EUR 1.1 million provides flexible funding through 
UNDP Funding Windows
 to support initiatives in the areas of Poverty and Inequality, as well as Governance, Peacebuilding, Crisis and Resilience.


As one of UNDP’s top 20 core donors, Luxembourg plays a vital role in enabling UNDP to reach those furthest behind, making faster progress towards the SDGs and the Paris Agreement.


Luxembourg’s sustained support to both core resources and Funding Windows demonstrates strong leadership in advancing the principles of the Funding Compact and strengthening the multilateral development system at a time of significant global financing pressures.


UNDP greatly appreciates Luxembourg’s continued trust in UNDP’s integrator role in poverty eradication, governance, crisis response and resilience-building efforts. Luxembourg’s support helps ensure that UNDP can continue to deliver integrated development solutions while strengthening institutional resilience and supporting the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.


***


For more information about UNDP’s partners, please visit:
www.undp.org/our-partners


About UNDP’s Core Resources:


UNDP relies on contributions from UN Member States, multilateral organizations, NGOs, corporations, financing institutions, and philanthropic groups. Regular “core” resources are the most flexible type of funding that UNDP receives. They allow for long-term development strategies, rapid crisis response, and addressing emerging challenges by filling resource gaps in underfunded areas, helping deliver impact where and when it is needed most.