Beirut, 22 May 2026
 – An alliance of international and local humanitarian non-governmental organizations in Lebanon have launched a global fundraising campaign to help families across the country recover from the compounded impacts of conflict, displacement and economic crisis. The initiative is led under the auspices of the Lebanese Ministry of Social Affairs and facilitated by the International Organization for Migration (IOM).


“Lebanon’s humanitarian emergency calls for a response that is fast, coordinated, and rooted in dignity,” said Minister Haneen Sayed. “The Ministry of Social Affairs has been leading this effort, including through the Shock-Responsive Safety Net, our national emergency cash assistance mechanism, which has already reached more than 140,000 displaced households. But the scale of need requires broader solidarity.”


Her Excellency added: “This global alliance brings together Lebanese diaspora communities, international supporters, and civil society organizations around a shared responsibility: to stand with families affected by war and displacement. Rooted for Lebanon is an important complement to national efforts, helping mobilize support where it is needed most.”


Lebanon continues to face one crisis after another. While the country struggles to recover from a prolonged economic and financial crisis, recent hostilities have further destabilized livelihoods, displaced families, and uprooted daily life. Even in homes that remain standing, households continue to face challenges in securing their basic needs, rebuilding incomes, and regaining stability.


“Cash assistance allows families the flexibility to prioritize what matters most. Whether it is food, medicine, shelter costs, or transportation, households know what their greatest needs are.” said IOM Lebanon Head of Office, Mathieu Luciano. “By providing cash support, we are reinforcing agency and helping families strengthen their foundation to regain stability.”


The international humanitarian alliance includes Save the Children Lebanon, World Vision in Lebanon, Care International in Lebanon, Himaya Daeem Aataa, and the Danish Refugee Council. This alliance ensures that assistance is delivered through established United Nations coordination mechanisms and community-based approaches. Households supported through the Rooted for Lebanon alliance are identified through national registries and partner assessments, enabling targeted assistance to reach those most in need.


Learn more and support the Rooted for Lebanon campaign by donating at 
Rooted for Lebanon
.


For more information, please visit 
IOM’s Media Centre
.