Secretary of War Pete Hegseth welcomed Iraqi Prime Minister Ali al-Zaidi to the Pentagon yesterday, where the two leaders met to discuss the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS, the end of the Operation Inherent Resolve mission and the future of the U.S.-Iraq relationship.












This was al-Zaidi's first stop on his first official trip to the U.S. since taking over as Iraq's prime minister in mid-May.


"It's an honor to have you here, and I want to commend you and your team for making Washington your first destination as the leader of Iraq," Hegseth told al-Zaidi at the outset of the meeting's public portion, adding that he viewed the meeting — as well as future engagements — to be important discussions.


Hegseth pointed out that the Pentagon is full of many current and prior service members who served during Operation Iraqi Freedom between 2003 and 2011, noting that he, himself, is an OIF veteran.


The secretary served in Iraq while assigned to the Army's 3rd Battalion, 187th Infantry Regiment, 101st Airborne Division, from 2005-2006.


He told al-Zaidi that serving in Iraq all those years ago made the meeting between the two men somewhat surreal.


"But it also makes me hopeful for the future of Iraq, for the future of the region and the future of our partnership as we move ahead toward security and prosperity," Hegseth said.


He then credited Iraq for its own counter-terror efforts.


"Like the great Americans that I mentioned [earlier], Iraqis have shed blood fighting [ISIS], inch by inch, fighting to free your country from ISIS' grip," Hegseth told al-Zaidi.












Along those lines, Hegseth reiterated that the U.S. military is on track to be fully withdrawn from Iraq by Sept. 30, something President Donald J. Trump and al-Zaidi confirmed during a meeting yesterday at the White House.


Despite that, however, Hegseth pointed out that Iran and its proxies in the region pose a threat to Iraq, seeking to deprive Iraqis of their choice to pursue prosperity and sovereignty.


Still, Hegseth said, the U.S. will stand by Iraq now and in the future.


"As the president stated [at the earlier meeting], you will find no better friend than the United States of America. … The Department of War is positioned to partner with an Iraq that chooses strength and security, not weakness or capitulation to Iran — which I know is a stance quite clearly taken by [al-Zaidi]," Hegseth said, adding that Iraq never belonged to deposed leader Saddam Hussein, al-Qaida, ISIS or Iran.


"[Iraq is] a strong, sovereign country that we look forward to partnering with in a strong, mutual benefit. And in that spirit, your excellency, the United States extends that hand of partnership," Hegseth said.


During his opening remarks, al-Zaidi thanked the U.S. military for its assistance in fighting ISIS in Iraq, adding that he looks forward to American commerce increasing in the region once the U.S. military mission in Iraq concludes.












"I think that economy really creates the bonds between people," he said. 


As recently as 2024, U.S. goods and services traded with Iraq totaled an estimated $12 billion, according to the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.