A fraudster who tried to sell fake ancient statues to Sotheby’s was foiled when his bogus accompanying paperwork was found to be written with printing methods that were 25 years too modern, a court has heard.
Andrew Crowley, 46, of Longwell Green, Gloucestershire 
Andrew Crowley, 46, asked the auctioneers to value three Cycladic figures and one Anatolian stargazer statuette that he had inherited from his grandfather, Southwark crown court in London was told on Friday.
Prosecutors alleged that, if real, the items collectively would have been worth about £680,000 based on previous sales.
However, Judge Rimmer said that estimate hinged on multiple hypotheticals and therefore reduced the value to £340,000.
Crowley, of Longwell Green, Gloucestershire, had presented spurious invoices for the statues that purported to be written in 1976, using a typewriter on paper embossed with an antique’s dealers logo and a nine-pence stamp.
However, his forgery was discovered after forensic scientists found they were made using printing methods invented in 2001. Sotheby’s experts also spotted spelling mistakes, including in the supplier’s title.
Letter shown in the trial of Andrew Crowley.
 Photograph: Metropolitan Police/PA
Handing Crowley a two-year suspended sentence, the judge said: “It was a crude attempt because Sotheby’s rumbled, to use the vernacular, or spotted, these documents as bogus fairly early on.”
The judge accepted that Crowley inherited the statues from his grandfather and did not at any point believe they were counterfeits. The Cycladic statues were each about 30cm (12in) tall weighing about 1kg, police said.
Legitimate Cycladics were made in the Cyclades islands in Greece during the bronze age, about 3,000 years ago. Therefore, “the offending and dishonesty in this case must turn around the paperwork”, the judge said.
Fake ancient statue Andrew Crowley tried to sell to Sotheby’s
 Photograph: Metropolitan Police/PA
Crowley previously admitted dishonestly making a false representation to Sotheby’s auction house intending to make gain between 4 November 2022 and 27 July 2023.
He was also ordered to complete 200 hours of unpaid work and pay £1,630 in costs over three months.
DC Ray Swan, who led the Metropolitan police’s investigation, said in a statement: “This case also highlights the crucial role played by industry experts in helping to protect the integrity of the London art market.
“Sotheby’s staff acted responsibly and swiftly in raising their concerns, and their cooperation was instrumental in preventing a significant fraud.”
A spokesperson for the auctioneers praised the force’s “meticulous and superbly executed investigation that has helped prevent fraudulent material entering the market”.