Adam Schiff says Todd Blanche is still acting as Donald Trump’s criminal defense lawyer' and should not be attorney general
Senator 
Adam Schiff
, a 
California
 Democrat and former federal prosecutor who serves on the Senate judiciary committee, has released a statement opposing the confirmation of Todd Blanche, the acting attorney general, to the job on a permanent basis.
Schiff says that Blanche has continued to act as Trump’s personal lawyer, noting in particular: his support for the indictment of 
James Comey
, the former FBI director and Trump critic, for posting an Instagram photo of seashells on a beach arranged to read: “86 47”; his decree that Trump and his family should be exempt from prosecution or audits by the IRS; his approval of a $1.776bn fund to reward Trump supporters who claim that they were prosecuted on political grounds.
Here is Schiff’s statement in full:


double quotation mark
“At every turn, Todd Blanche has been unable to put aside his role as Donald Trump’s criminal defense lawyer and represent the American people instead.


“He has allowed the President to abuse the Department of Justice to go after his political enemies with absurd seashells cases, engaged in the most blatant self-dealing by representing both Trump and his government in an IRS scam, and blessed a corrupt slush fund for cop beaters.


“This is hardly the stuff of Attorney Generals.


“The Senate must vigorously oppose his confirmation.”


Key events
Independent senator Bernie Sanders announced he was working on legislation that would create a sovereign wealth fund that would take stakes in AI companies to manage the technology’s expected disruptions to the economy and day-to-day life.
“Seems to me that, given the fact that it is the people who whose work is the foundation, whose labor is the foundation of AI, they should have some say in the future of AI,” Sanders said at an event hosted by the National Press Club in Washington DC Monday.
The bill, which Sanders said he would release in the coming weeks, would give the proposed fund 
a 50% stake
 in major AI companies and half the seats on their boards. “What it will give us is the ability to stop decisions that are simply geared to make more and more profit for the owners of the industry,” Sanders said, comparing the proposal to sovereign wealth funds in Norway and Alaska that manage proceeds from those regions’ oil production.
In March, Sanders 
introduced
 a federal moratorium on new datacenter construction, with New York representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez introducing the House version. Sanders argued the construction halt was necessary to slow down the growth of the AI industry so that proper regulations could first be applied.
“There are very few people who doubt that AI is the most transformational technology in the history of the world. It makes the industrial revolution seem very, very modest,” Sanders said.
Speaking of his datacenter moratorium, the senator said: “Let’s get our act together. Let’s know where we are going, what the impact is going to be on working people, on ordinary Americans, before we proceed.”
Tina Smith, who replaced Al Franken in the Senate over #MeToo allegations, says she would vote for Graham Platner, 'no question'
Senator 
Tina Smith
, a Minnesota Democrat, said in a social media post on Monday that she would vote for 
Graham Platner
 if she lived in Maine, where he is running for the US Senate, despite allegations of misconduct from one former romantic partner.
“Graham Platner is gonna win because he has connected with Mainers on what they really care about: How this country can work for them, not just the wealthy. He’ll win because he’s not part of the Washington establishment”, 
Smith wrote
. “If I voted in Maine he’d have my support, no question.”
Smith was first appointed to the Senate in 2017 to replace 
Al Franken
, who resigned 
at the height of the #MeToo movement
 after allegations of unwanted touching or kissing from several women.
(In the interest of full disclosure, your current live blogger worked briefly for Franken’s radio show in 2004.)
Share
Updated at 
18.08 EDT
Sanders says Trump's NBC interview shows he is 'a mentally unstable person who has strong paranoid tendencies'
Speaking to Robert Costa, the CBS News correspondent, at the National Press Club in Washington on Monday, senator 
Bernie Sanders
 said that Americans of all parties “are disgusted” with 
Donald Trump
’s “illegal and unconstitutional war in Iran”.
“People are tired of the arrogance, the narcissism. I mean, you know, we get used to this stuff, but the idea that you have a president wants to name every bloody thing after himself is weird”, the runner-up for the Democratic nomination for the presidency in both 2016 and 2020 continued.
Trump’s Meet the Press interview over the weekend, Sanders added: “Again, we say, ‘Oh well, that’s just Trump’. But that is a mentally unstable person… who has strong paranoid tendencies.
“I mean, NBC is against him, ABC is against him, CBS is against him”, Sanders went on, mocking 
Trump’s intemperate complaint
 that he gets “bad press” before he stormed ou of the interview after being pressed to present evidence for his baseless claim that US elections are “rigged”.
“That is, to say the least a dangerous situation for somebody like that to be in the White House”, Sanders said.
Bernie Sanders says he is not running for president in 2028
Asked about supporters who want to see him run for the presidency again in 2028, 
Bernie Sanders
, who would turn 87 before the election that year, joked that that is “because they want youthful vigor in the White House!”
Ventriloquizing his supporters, he continued: “'We’re tired of these 30 and 40 year old people; what we really need are 80 year olds running the country!”
“I suspect that’s not going to happen”, he added. “I know I look like I am 30. I am not.”
Bernie Sanders says he will 'do everything I can to make sure Graham Platner' wins Maine Senate race
In an interview at the National Press Club in Washington DC on Monday, 
Bernie Sanders
, the socialist senator from Vermont, 
was asked
 if he still supports 
Graham Platner
, who is running for the Democratic nomination for the US Senate, despite 
allegations of misconduct
 by a former romantic partner.
“I’m going to do everything I can to make sure Graham Platner is the next senator from the state of Maine,” Sanders said.
Lyndsey Fifield
, 
a Republican operative
 Platner dated between 2013 and 2105, told the New York Times that he was physically abusive to her on two occasions and that he knew then that a tattoo on his chest he got while serving in the military was a Nazi symbol. Platner denied ever being physically abusive or knowing that the tattoo was used by the Nazi SS until recently, when he had it covered up.
After the event was disrupted by protesters calling on Sanders to vote against all US aid to Israel, Sanders was pressed on those allegations.
Sanders, who was an early and ardent backer of Platner, said his Republican opponents are not worried about Platner’s treatment of women. “What they are worried about is that he is is going to be a strong voice against oligarchy.”
He then noted that Platner had served multiple tours in Iraq and Afghanistan in the US military and suffered from PTSD as a result, when he got home. “He saw some horrible things and participated in some very horrible things one wishes human beings did not have to go through,” Sanders said. He added that Platner got help, through the VA, and is now married and has “gotten his life together.”
“Sp, to my mind, I don’t know what is true or not true. He denies it, she says something else. But what I do know is that there are people in the United States Senate right now who are not saints,” he added.
“There are people who have voted for tax breaks for billionaires, and threw 15 million people off of their health care that they had which resulted in tens of thousand of Americans dying,” he continued. “There are people who voted for the war in Iraq, which was based on a lie; there are people who voted to support the president in this terrible war in Iran right now.”
“To my mind right now we need allies in the United States Senate who have the guts to take on the big money that is dominating this country, who have the guts to say that every American is entitled to health care as a human right”, Sanders added.
“People who have the guts, and in his case, from a very personal experience, that we don’t go into wars unless we know what we are fighting for and unless those wars are based on truth not lies”, the senator concluded. “I’m supporting Graham Platner.”
Share
Updated at 
17.16 EDT
Adam Schiff says Todd Blanche is still acting as Donald Trump’s criminal defense lawyer' and should not be attorney general
Senator 
Adam Schiff
, a 
California
 Democrat and former federal prosecutor who serves on the Senate judiciary committee, has released a statement opposing the confirmation of Todd Blanche, the acting attorney general, to the job on a permanent basis.
Schiff says that Blanche has continued to act as Trump’s personal lawyer, noting in particular: his support for the indictment of 
James Comey
, the former FBI director and Trump critic, for posting an Instagram photo of seashells on a beach arranged to read: “86 47”; his decree that Trump and his family should be exempt from prosecution or audits by the IRS; his approval of a $1.776bn fund to reward Trump supporters who claim that they were prosecuted on political grounds.
Here is Schiff’s statement in full:


double quotation mark
“At every turn, Todd Blanche has been unable to put aside his role as Donald Trump’s criminal defense lawyer and represent the American people instead.


“He has allowed the President to abuse the Department of Justice to go after his political enemies with absurd seashells cases, engaged in the most blatant self-dealing by representing both Trump and his government in an IRS scam, and blessed a corrupt slush fund for cop beaters.


“This is hardly the stuff of Attorney Generals.


“The Senate must vigorously oppose his confirmation.”


Chuck Grassley says Todd Blanche, Trump's former personal lawyer, 'is well-qualified' to be attorney general
Chuck Grassley
, the Republican chair of the US Senate judiciary committee that has to confirm a new attorney general, said in a statement on Monday that 
Donald Trump
 has officially nominated his former personal lawyer, 
Todd Blanche
, now the acting attorney general. In a statement, Grassley also called Blanche, a “well-qualified” nominee.
Here is Grassley’s 
full statement
:


double quotation mark
Today, the Senate received President Trump’s nomination of Todd Blanche to be United States Attorney General. Maintaining the Department of Justice’s ability to protect Americans from crime and hold criminals accountable is essential for the safety of American families. I’ve worked well with Acting Attorney General Blanche for more than a year and appreciate his commitment to transparency and support for law enforcement. Blanche is well-qualified and has shown his dedication to restoring law and order across our country. The Senate Judiciary Committee’s work to process Blanche’s nomination is underway.”


Share
Updated at 
16.52 EDT
Trump nominates Todd Blanche to serve permanently as attorney general
As expected, 
Donald Trump
 has nominated 
Todd
 
Blanche
 to serve permanently as attorney general, lining up his former personal lawyer to be the country’s ⁠top ⁠law ⁠enforcement officer.
The US president 
suggested last week
 that Blanche, who was 
appointed on an acting basis in April
 after the president fired 
Pam Bondi
, was set to receive the nod. “He’s a very talented guy,” Trump told a podcast.
Under Blanche – a staunch 
ally of Trump
 – the US Department of Justice has pursued a series of controversial actions, including the unveiling of criminal charges against 
James Comey
, the former FBI director, representing an escalation of its investigation into former CIA director, 
John Brennan
, and the removal of press releases about prosecutions of rioters who attacked the US Capitol on 
January 6
.
Blanche also played a key role in the effort to create a $1.8bn “anti-weaponization” fund to compensate Trump’s allies. On Tuesday, he 
abruptly announced the fund had been axed
, amid widespread condemnation of the plan, but a provision granting Trump, his family and his businesses immunity from IRS audits would remain in place.
Blanche’s appointment will require confirmation in the US Senate, where even 
Republicans
 pushed back against the proposed fund.
Hours after Trump announced his intention to nominate Blanche permanently for the position, Senate majority leader 
John Thune
 said it was “hard to say” whether Blanche will have a difficult time getting the votes.
“I think obviously most of our members are pretty deferential to who the president wants in these key positions. He’s already serving in the role already, and clearly has experience in it,” Thune said. “But this is an environment where nothing is a safe or sure bet.”
Todd Blanche testifies on Capitol Hill on 2 June.
 Photograph: Evelyn Hockstein/Reuters
Explainer: Trump claims he ‘didn’t guarantee’ no US wars. Here’s what he’s actually said
Donald Trump
 has forcefully denied he ever promised not to draw the US into war, having spent years pledging to avoid doing just that.
The US president’s 
own biography
 on the White House website credits him with 
“putting a stop to endless wars”
 – raising questions about the 
US-Israel
 war on 
Iran
, which he launched, with no end currently in sight.
NBC’s Kristen Welker pressed Trump in a Meet the Press interview that aired yesterday about his previous pledges to refrain from starting wars.
“Mr President, in your first term, you held to that promise, and it was so fundamental to who you were as a candidate, to a first-term president,” she said. “What changed? Because you insisted no new wars.”
“I didn’t guarantee 
no
 war,” Trump interjected. “Why would I have built the strongest military in the world? I built our military.”
His response sharply contradicts previous comments he has made over the years, including when 
accepting
 his victory in the 2024 US presidential election.


double quotation mark
We want want security. We want to have things be good, safe. We want great education. We want a strong and powerful military. And ideally, we don’t have to use it. You know, we had no war – four years, we had no wars, except we defeated Isis. We defeated Isis in record time, but we had no wars.


They said: ‘He will start a war.’ I’m not going to start a war. I’m going to stop wars.


My colleague George Chidi has compiled all the president’s war quotes here:




Fears of a return to a full-scale regional war eased on Monday as Israel and Iran said they had halted attacks on each other after an appeal from Donald Trump to “immediately stop shooting”.
 The new violence has complicated Trump’s push to end the war he and Israel started back in February. Trump has leaned on Israel to stop its attacks in Lebanon to allow room for a deal to end the wider war with Iran, including an obscenities-filled rebuke of Netanyahu in a phone call last week, but the Israeli PM faces an election later this year and is under domestic pressure to continue efforts to broaden his assault on Lebanon. Here’s our 
news story
 and 
analysis
 of the ever more strained Trump-Netanyahu relationship.




A federal judge struck down a $100,000 fee that Trump imposed on new H-1B visas for foreign workers in highly skilled occupations, such as IT, healthcare and engineering, as unlawful and said it must be invalidated.
 Judge Leo Sorokin, an Obama appointee, concluded that the fee was not a penalty but a tax that the president lacked any authorization from Congress to issue. Here’s our 
report
.




 Trump
 
again repeated his baseless claim that the
 
California elections were “rigged”, this time in reference to the Los Angeles mayoral primary and reality TV star
 
Spencer Pratt
. “Not possible for Spencer Pratt to have lost the L.A. runoffs after the big lead he had,” Trump posted on Truth Social. It comes as Nithya Raman, the progressive Los Angeles city councillor, appeared to be edging out Pratt in the race. More on that 
here
.




The Trump administration has plans to announce today that it is seeking to revoke the citizenship of 17 US citizens accused of immigration fraud, 
CBS News reported
, significantly expanding Trump’s already 
unprecedented denaturalization drive
. Justice department officials told CBS News the move represents the largest-ever effort by the US government to use its denaturalization powers, which were rarely invoked before Trump returned to the White House last year with promises to launch a historic mass deportation campaign. More on this story 
here
.




Trump’s hardline border czar Tom Homan again threatened to dispatch a surge of immigration agents to New York City, as the administration vows to press ahead with its controversial crackdown. 
Homan said he had reviewed a plan to 
expand ICE operations in New York
 and deploy “more ICE agents than you’ve ever seen” in the city. It comes as millions are expected to visit the region to celebrate the New York Knicks in the NBA finals, as well as for the Fifa World Cup final, which will take place in New Jersey. “We will not allow ICE or anyone else to sow fear in our communities – especially at this moment,” Zohran Mamdani,
 
New York City’s Democratic mayor, responded on X. “As the world comes to our city, we will stand proudly with our immigrant neighbors and reject these attacks for what they are: an attempt to divide us.”




And finally, a five-block area around Madison Square Garden will be on virtual lockdown during Trump’s visit for tonight’s NBA Finals game. 
Amid heightened security due to Trump’s attendance, the watch party outside MSG was cancelled, though the city has organized other free ones in Central Park and Brooklyn Bowl. Go Knicks!


Analysis: complex relationship between Trump and Netanyahu continues to undermine Middle East ceasefire
The latest eruption of hostilities between 
Israel
 and 
Iran
 appears to have been contained for now after 
Donald Trump
 insisted he called “all the shots” in the Middle East, but in a dangerously fragile region 
Benjamin Netanyahu
 has again shown he is ready to take shots of his own.
The 
exchange of missiles
 on Sunday and Monday was ample demonstration of the inherent instability of the current limbo between war and peace, but it also shone a bright light on 
the complex and conflicted relationship between the US president and the Israeli prime minister, frenemies who could determine the fate of the current ceasefire
.
Trump and Netanyahu went to war together against Iran on 28 February but 
fell out of step within days
, as soon as it was clear that the quick victory and regime change promised by the Israelis was unlikely to materialise. From then on, 
their interests have increasingly diverged.
Netanyahu’s political logic drives him towards further onslaught in the hope of a breakthrough, such as regime collapse in Tehran. To secure support from the Israeli far right, 
Netanyahu has to show himself ready to defy Trump from time to time in pursuing that multi-front campaign, but no leader of Israel can afford to burn bridges with Washington, its principal security guarantor. That leaves a fine line to tread.
Persuading Trump to join the attack on Iran was the biggest victory of Netanyahu’s career, but that triumph is crumbling.
 The US-Iranian peace deal is being negotiated without Israeli participation, and in its current reported form, would leave the regime in power with a restricted but continuing nuclear programme. By Tehran’s insistence, any agreement would also tie Israel’s hands in dealing with 
Hezbollah
 in 
Lebanon
.
Netanyahu’s best bet for his political survival is that the peace talks will fail
, and the US will be drawn back into the war on Iran.
 Officials in his government have consistently predicted that outcome in off-the-record briefings, and so far they have been right. For all his repeated claims that peace is almost at hand, Trump has clearly found it hard to stomach any deal that would compare with the 
nuclear agreement
 achieved by Barack Obama in 2015, especially if it involves anything as visually embarrassing as the delivery of unfrozen Iranian assets in the form of pallets of cash flown into Tehran. The 
weekend’s eruption of hostilities
 and their temporary resolution does not bring an exit from that limbo any closer.
So far this year, Trump and Netanyahu have found common remedy for their domestic predicament by going to war. Netanyahu is still determined to press on and take US military might with him, while Trump is wavering. 
As long as this two-man drama remains unresolved, the Middle East will continue to pay the price.
Here’s Julian’s full analysis:
Share
Updated at 
16.07 EDT
Scientists inside the Trump administration’s 
Environmental Protection Agency
 
have told CNN (paywall)
 they are 
being pushed to
 
downplay potential risks of household products 
such as cleaners and cosmetics
.
According to CNN’s report, the scientists say they are “
under pressure to alter safety reviews
 of chemicals commonly found in consumer products like household cleaners and cosmetics 
to make risks to human health and the environment disappear on paper
”.
They are also “being told to 
stop considering the impact a chemical may have on specific racial groups
” and “some veteran employees say they have been 
pressed to make chemicals appear safe by coming up with test parameters that aren’t realistic
”.
The EPA said it is “using realistic exposure scenarios rather than defaulting to compounded worst-case assumptions”, and is maintaining “gold-standard science”.
Share
Updated at 
15.22 EDT
Trump
’s border czar 
Tom Homan
’s latest threat 
to send more ICE agents to New York City
 comes as millions are expected to visit the region to celebrate the New York Knicks in the 
NBA finals
, as well as for the 
Fifa World Cup final
, which will take place about 10 miles outside of the city, in New Jersey.
“We will not allow ICE or anyone else to sow fear in our communities – especially at this moment,” 
Zohran Mamdani, 
New York City’s Democratic mayor, responded on X. “As the world comes to our city, 
we will stand proudly with our immigrant neighbors and reject these attacks for what they are: an attempt to divide us
.”
“Soccer would not exist without immigrants,” Mamdani added. “Immigrants play and coach the game, work in the stadiums, fill the stands, and make celebrations like the World Cup possible. Six of the players on the US Men’s National Team are immigrants.”
It comes as immigrant rights advocates have 
issued travel warnings
 for the 10 million visitors expected to travel to the US for the World Cup, the world’s largest sporting event, that they risk “serious rights violations” under the current political climate, including “arbitrary denial of entry and risk of arrest, detention and/or deportation”.
A reminder that least 
18 people have died
 this year in ICE custody. And in January, amidst an enforcement surge in 
Minneapolis
, immigration officers killed two US citizens, 
Renee Nicole Good
 and 
Alex Pretti
, in a matter of weeks.
Share
Updated at 
15.37 EDT
The 
Iranian
 regime has announced the end of attacks against 
Israel
, while 
Donald Trump
 has claimed both sides “want a ceasefire”. This comes after Israel and Iran 
attacked each other’s territory
 for the first time since a fragile ceasefire took effect in April. The Israeli strikes are in apparent defiance of the US president, who told 
Benjamin Netanyahu
 not to retaliate against Iran, in order to avoid derailing peace talks.
To unpack all of this in today’s edition of The Latest podcast, 
Nosheen Iqbal
 speaks to the Guardian’s senior international correspondent 
Julian Borger
.
Israel and Iran trade strikes: what does this mean for peace deal? - The Latest
Share
Updated at 
15.38 EDT
Further to that last 
post
, the increase in fees under Trump discouraged H-1B visa requests, Reuters reports. As of 15 February, USCIS had received just 85 payments of the $100,000 fee, the administration said in a March filing.
The administration argued that the fee constituted a monetary penalty that the president had lawful authority to impose under federal immigration law to restrict the entry of certain foreign nationals.
But 
Judge Leo Sorokin
, an Obama appointee, concluded that 
the fee was not a penalty but a tax that the president lacked any authorization from Congress to issue
. He wrote:


double quotation mark
Here, the substance and application of the $100,000 payment reveal that it is a tax, regardless of what the payment is called.


Share
Updated at 
13.57 EDT
Trump's $100,000 H-1B visa fee is unlawful, US judge rules
A federal judge has struck down a $100,000 fee that 
Donald
 
Trump
 
imposed on new H-1B visas
 for foreign workers in highly skilled occupations, such as IT, healthcare and engineering, as unlawful and said it must be invalidated.
US district judge 
Leo Sorokin
 in Boston issued the ruling in a lawsuit filed by 20 Democratic state attorneys general challenging a fee Trump announced last year that dramatically raised the cost of obtaining H-1B visas.
There are as many as 730,000 H-1B holders in the US, and an additional 550,000 dependents, including spouses and children, who together make up nearly 1.3 million residents, according to a January 2025 
report
 from fwd.us, an immigration and criminal justice advocacy group.
The cost for an H-1B previously ranged from about 
$1,700 to $4,500
, depending on whether the visa was expedited. Each year, Congress caps H-1B visas at 85,000, awarded through a lottery system. To enter, companies pay a $215 registration fee, followed by the thousands of dollars more in application fees and legal costs if selected.
But in September, the 
Trump administration
 increased the fee for skilled foreign workers applying for H-1B visas to $100,000, claiming the visas were being “abused” to undercut American wages and outsource IT jobs.
In the highly watched Senate election in Texas, in which Democrat 
James Talarico
 will be battling it out the Trump-backed 
Ken Paxton
, Talarico has gained an unlikely supporter.
Dan Cogdell, an attorney who helped lead Paxton’s defense during his 2023 impeachment trial on corruption charges, 
gave a statement to NOTUS 
on Monday that he would be supporting Talarico.
Cogdell told Notus that his former client – the attorney general of Texas – “has lost sight of his core mission, which is to represent the people of Texas.
“And unlike Ken, I believe to my core that James Talarico believes in unity over division and that he knows how to assemble not only Democrats, but Independents and 
Republicans
, and we need that right now,” Cogdell said.
Share
Updated at 
13.18 EDT
Trump’s border czar threatens to send ‘more ICE agents than you’ve ever seen’ to New York City
Vivian Ho
Donald Trump
’s hardline border czar has again threatened to dispatch a surge of immigration agents to 
New York City
, as the administration vows to press ahead with its controversial crackdown.
Tom Homan
 said today that he had reviewed a plan to expand 
Immigration Enforcement and Customs (ICE)
 operations in New York and deploy “more ICE agents than you’ve ever seen” in the city.
Homan said
 in an interview on Fox News
 that he is making good on a promise he made to 
Kathy Hochul
, the Democratic governor of New York, that he would increase ICE presence in New York if the state passed legislation barring state and local law enforcement from working with immigration in New York jails.
Hochul
 signed the bill into law
 at the end of last month.
“
I made her a promise: you’re going to see more ICE agents than you’ve ever seen in New York City, and it’s coming
,” Homan said. “
I just reviewed an operational plan.
”
Homan has 
repeatedly threatened
 to send more ICE personnel to New York, as well as to other Democrat-run sanctuary cities around the country that limit the cooperation between local agencies and federal immigration authorities.
Such a move has so far yet to materialize in New York.
More here:
Share
Updated at 
13.27 EDT
Trump invokes rigged California election claim over Spencer Pratt mayoral results in LA
Donald Trump
 again repeated his claim on Monday that the California election was rigged, this time in reference to the Los Angeles mayoral primary and reality TV star 
Spencer Pratt
.
“Not possible for Spencer Pratt to have lost the L.A. runoffs after the big lead he had,” Trump posted on Truth Social.
Trump 
had endorsed Pratt
, a former Republican, a move that may have acted more as a hindrance than a help in deep-blue Los Angeles. Pratt 
has fallen behind
 LA city council member 
Nithya Raman 
in the contest to face the incumbent mayor, 
Karen Bass
, in the November run-off election.
In the same post, Trump called 
California
 a “3rd World Nation” before declaring “Rigged Elections!” and asserting that “they” will now “be working on great guy Steve Hilton” – a Republican in the California gubernatorial race.
Share
Updated at 
14.31 EDT