ALLOCATION  AND TARGETED BENEFICIARIES BY LOCATION
GUAVIARE 
Partners by cluster
LIMPAL: Child Protection AoR, 
GBV AoR
CAQUETÁ 
Partners by cluster
Apoyar: Protection, GBV AoR
Colombia
PEOPLE TARGETED 
VALLE DEL CAUCA 
Partners by cluster
GENFAMI: Protection, Health
Tierra de Paz: Food Security, Protection, Health, WASH, Education in 
Emergencies, Mine Action AoR
Sisma Mujer: Protection, GBV AoR
Benposta Nación de Muchachos: Food Security, Protection, WASH, Shelter, 
Child Protection AoR, GBV AoR
The boundaries and names shown and the designations used on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations.
Creation date: 19 Jun 2026     Sources: GMS, FTS    Feedback: ocha-colombia@un.org  ocha-lachf@un.org  www.unocha.org     www.reliefweb.int
The Regional Humanitarian Fund for Latin America and the Caribbean (RHPF LAC) has launched 
its first standard allocation for 2025 in Colombia with US$1.5 million to address urgent humanitar-
ian needs caused by armed conflict and disasters. The allocation seeks to support life-saving 
assistance through localized, rapid response mechanisms and community-based protection 
approaches, particularly in hard-to-reach areas with limited humanitarian presence, including 
Guaviare, Caquetá and Valle del Cauca.
Colombia continues to face a complex humanitarian crisis driven by armed conflict and recurrent 
disasters. In 2025, over 1.6 million people people were affected by displacement, confinement, 
and mobility restrictions, with vulnerable groups such as Indigenous, Afro-descendant, rural, 
migrant and refugee populations, bearing the greatest impact. The country remains among those 
most affected globally by internal displacement, while food insecurity, protection risks, and 
limited access to basic services persist at alarming levels. 
The allocation prioritizes two complementary pillars: delivering immediate, multisectoral 
assistance to populations affected by sudden emergencies, and strengthening community 
self-protection mechanisms in contexts of escalating conflict. By emphasizing local capacity, 
community engagement, and integrated responses, the fund aims to both address acute humani-
tarian needs and contribute to more sustainable, locally driven solutions in high-risk areas.
ALLOCATION STRATEGY  
OVERVIEW
Provide humanitarian assistance to 
emergencies caused by armed conflict and 
natural disasters for more than 10,000 people 
in need through rapid response mechanisms 
and community-based protection. 
Protection-centered 
approach with a strong 
focus on GBV , child 
protection, and mine action.
Joint work with communities 
and local partners to 
implement key interventions in 
Health, WASH, Education, Food 
Security, and Shelter. 
Promote community 
participation to 
strengthen local 
self-protection capacities 
and autonomy. 
REGIONAL HUMANITARIAN POOLED FUND 
COLOMBIA
Standard Allocation 2025
May 2026
The boundaries and names shown and the designations used on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations.
Creation date: 19 Jun 2026     Sources: GMS, FTS    Feedback: ocha-colombia@un.org  ocha-lachf@un.org  www.unocha.org     www.reliefweb.int
people from affected communities beneﬁt from 
awareness-raising and guidance campaigns on 
protection issues, including access to services 
and the restoration of rights.
people are beneﬁting 
from specialized 
protection services.
people at risk of accidents 
involving landmines, 
unexploded ordnance or 
improvised explosive devices 
now have access to mine risk 
education programs.
CHILD PROTECTION
1,906 
people accessing protection 
activities and/or services through 
child-friendly spaces, including 
more than 496 children beneﬁting 
from speciﬁc measures aimed at 
preventing their recruitment.
GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE 
1,025 
people beneﬁt from activities related to the prevention, mitigation and 
response to gender-based violence. This includes 120 women and girls who 
will receive psychosocial support.
displaced or conﬁned 
individuals receive 
mental health or 
psychosocial support 
services.
individuals receive 
primary healthcare 
services, including 
nutritional care.
individuals participate 
in the formation of 
community health 
committees in areas 
affected by conﬂict or 
climate-related events. 
FOOD SECURITY
3,850 
people receive 
food assistance in 
kind.
WASH
2,940 
people who can 
access information, 
services and 
interventions related 
to hygiene promotion.
2,050
people receiving 
critical WASH 
supplies.
PROTECTION HEALTH
MINE ACTION 
1,500 
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES & EXPECTED ACHIEVEMENTS 
RHPF COLOMBIA DONORS 2025 
For further information on contributions to the Fund: cbpf.data.unocha.org 
ECHO, Sweden and Spain.
$530k
$339k
$176k
$107k
$92k
$70k
$37k
$27k
$23kShelter
Education in Emergencies
Mine Action
WASH
Food Security
Health
Child Protection
GBV AoR
Protection
ALLOCATION  BY CLUSTER 
ALLOCATION BY PARTNER TYPE
REGIONAL HUMANITARIAN POOLED FUND FOR LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN - Colombia