United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 
 
Highlights 
 Following the 24 June earthquakes of magnitude 7.2 and 7.5 (18:00 local 
time), authorities report more than 1,100 aftershocks. 
 Official toll: 4,118 people dead and 16,740 injured. 
 A total of 6,462 people have been rescued. 
 Tom Fletcher, the United Nation’ s humanitarian chief, concluded his 
four-day visit to the country and called for sustained international 
support for the Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP). 
 An additional appeal for US$298  million was launched to scale up the 
earthquake response and address the multisectoral needs of 1.3 million 
people over the next six months. 
 The United Nations system and its partner organizations, in coordination with 
the Government, are responding with multisectoral actions and will continue to scale up assistance to 
affected people. 
 
Situation overview 
Venezuela is facing a national 
emergency following two consecutive 
high-magnitude earthquakes (7.2 and 
7.5) that struck on 24 June (18:00 local 
time) in the north- central region, with 
the epicentre located along the San 
Felipe–Yumare–Montalbán axis 
(Yaracuy/Carabobo). Authorities 
report 1,171 aftershocks. 
 
Authorities report a toll of 4,118 people 
dead, 16,740 injured, and 6,462  
rescued since the onset of the 
emergency. Authorities also reported 
that approximately 17,907 people lost 
their homes. 
 
The Government response remains focused on search and rescue operations , the preparation and 
expansion of transitional camps and assistance to affected populations. The United Nations and its partner 
organizations, in coordination with the authorities, are implementing multisectoral response activities and 
will continue to scale up assistance to affected people.  The United Nations Under-Secretary-General for 
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Tom Fletcher, concluded his four -day visit to 
Venezuela on Friday and called on the international community to maintain its support for the Humanitarian 
Response Plan (HRP) to help address the most urgent needs of people in vulnerable situations.
 
 
Impact on infrastructure 
 Authorities report at least 856 affected buildings, including 190 that have collapsed.  
 An initial assessment by the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) indicates 
that direct damage to housing and infrastructure amounts to approximately US$37 billion. Most of 
the damage, estimated at around US$24 billion, is concentrated  in housing, businesses, schools, 
 Situation Report No. 17 
 Earthquakes in Venezuela 
 10 July 2026 
 Time: 9:00 pm 
 
4,118 
16,740 
Dead 
people 
 
Injured 
people
OCHA | 2 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
hospitals, and public facilities. Meanwhile, preliminary estimates by UNDP indicate direct physical 
damage of US$6.7 billion, equivalent to 6 per cent of GDP. 
 
National response 
 The Government response remains focused on search and rescue operations, as well as assistance 
to affected people. 
 According to authorities, the response continues with 89 transitional camps supporting affected 
populations, with a capacity of 24,280 people and a current occupancy of 17 ,128 people (70 per 
cent). As of 10 July, 40 camps are located in Caracas, 26 in La Guaira, and 23 in Miranda. 
 The Government of Venezuela announced the creation of an initial reconstruction fund equivalent to 
US$200 million. 
 A psychosocial support hotline remains available for affected people: 0800-AYUDA-01. 
 A digital form has been launched by the National Council for Persons with Disabilities (CONAPDIS) 
to support a timely and inclusive response in affected areas. 
 Mechanisms have been established to locate missing persons (www.localizapacientes.com) and to 
report affected individuals (0-800-RESCATE). 
 Authorities have resumed administrative activities in states not affected by the earthquakes and in 
areas where educational infrastructure shows no visible damage. Meanwhile, school activities 
remain suspended in affected municipalities across the states of Aragua (Santiago Mariño, Girardot, 
Ocumare de la Costa de Oro and Tovar); Carabobo (Juan José Mora, Puerto Cabello, Naguanagua 
and Valencia); Falcón (José Laurencio Silva); La Guaira (Vargas); the Capital District (Libertador); 
and Miranda (Chacao, Barut a, El Hatillo, Sucre, Plaza, Zamora, Acevedo, Brión, Buroz, Páez, 
Andrés Bello and Pedro Gual). 
 
Situation by state 
Capital District (Caracas) and Miranda  
 Together with the authorities of Miranda state, members of the Inter -Cluster Coordination Group, 
PAHO/WHO, UNHCR, Cedesex and OCHA visited a transitional camp in Cristóbal Rojas 
municipality. A follow- up meeting was agreed to discuss joint actions on mental health and 
psychosocial support at the regional level, together with the Secretariat for Women and Gender 
Equality and the Secretariat of Health. 
 In Chacao municipality, Miranda state, authorities announced that they have entered the technical 
assessment phase for affected infrastructure and reported that 26 buildings require further 
inspection. 
Response actions: Three (3) VHF- funded organizations operating in municipalities across Miranda 
state and the Capital District (Cedesex, Construyendo Futuros and FUNDANA) are supporting the initial 
response through general protection, child protection and gender -based violence (GBV) services.  In 
addition, organizations such as Tinta Violeta, FUNDANA and World Vision are providing protection 
support to affected families, particularly through psychosocial assistance.  
 
La Guaira 
 Coordination efforts among authorities, clusters and humanitarian organizations continue to 
strengthen the response in La Guaira’s transitional camps, including needs monitoring, the 
expansion of sectoral services, and improvements in shelter conditions, p rotection services and 
assistance for affected populations. 
 
Response actions: Five (5) partners of the Venezuela Humanitarian Fund (VHF) are supporting the 
response through primary health care and psychological support services (Fundación Proyecto 
Maniapure, Paluz, Ven Da Tu Mano, Venezuelan Red Cross and Tinta Violeta). 
 
Carabobo and Yaracuy (epicentral zone) 
 In Carabobo, the most significant impacts continue to be concentrated in Juan José Mora 
municipality (Morón parish). In Yaracuy, particularly in Veroes municipality and other localities near
OCHA | 3 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
the epicentral area, homes have been reported as destroyed or at high risk. Recent assessments 
have identified priority needs in protection, mental health and psychosocial support, health, shelter, 
water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), and food security. 
Response actions: Five organizations (Venezuelan Red Cross, CESAP, Tierra Viva, Cáritas Morón 
and Empodérame) are providing response in health, food, water and the distribution of humanitarian 
assistance. 
 
Falcón (Tucacas – Silva municipality) 
 As part of ongoing coordination efforts, a meeting was scheduled for next week between UNICEF 
and organizations from the Local Coordination Forum (LCF) supporting the response in Silva 
municipality to share analyses of identified needs and gaps and strengthen joint action. 
 Regional authorities requested that Palmasola municipality be included in the water, sanitation and 
hygiene (WASH) and psychosocial support activities planned for next week. Proposed meetings with 
UNICEF to identify areas for collaboration will focus on the El Niño Simón Foundation, the Secretariat 
for Women and Gender Equality, the Child Protection System, and Hidrofalcón. 
 
Response actions: The Protection Cluster’s training cycle and planned operational activities in Boca de 
Aroa are ongoing, including psychosocial support and WASH interventions implemented by Action Against 
Hunger, Azul Positivo, IOM and Centroccidente, in coordination with regional authorities. 
 
Other states 
 In Anzoátegui state, students from the Universidad de Oriente (UDO)–Barcelona Campus continue 
operating a collection centre that has supported around 30 affected families. Civil Protection and 
Fire Services intensified inspections of educational facilities, while the s tate dispatched more than 
450 metric tons of humanitarian assistance by sea to the central region. 
 In Apure state, authorities report that more than 250 people have been displaced by the earthquakes 
to date. The Local Coordination Forum (LCF) continues to support a coordinated response through 
multisectoral assistance to displaced families, including psychological first aid (PFA). 
 In Bolívar state, 600 metric tons of humanitarian assistance were dispatched from the State 
Logistics Hub, located at the VEN 911 headquarters, to the national collection centre in La Carlota. 
The assistance included contributions from community and sectoral actors, including the Indigenous 
Federation of Bolívar State and the Mayor’s Office of El Palmar (Padre Pedro Chien Municipality). 
In the areas of mental health and protection, Cáritas Guayana, the Bolívar Psychologists Association 
and UGMA–Guayana Campus established psychological first aid (PFA) services, while 200 VEN 
911 personnel were certified in PFA. 
 In Delta Amacuro state, the Acting Governor, the Social Cabinet and the Single Health Authority 
report a total of 98 affected people who have been relocated as part of family reunification and 
transfer processes. Authorities requested support for mobility tracking, mapping of relocated 
individuals and capacity strengthening in humanitarian information management. Priority needs were 
also identified in mental health and psychosocial support, particularly among adults experiencing 
acute stress who arrived from Caracas and La Guaira, as well as older people. Tinta Violeta, CESAP 
and PUI are expected to support these efforts. 
 As part of the response in Delta Amacuro, WFP will distribute rapid -response food baskets to 52 
people whose return was rescheduled by authorities for 15 July. World Vision is preparing 22 food 
packages for families with children and adolescents, while Cáritas Delta Amacuro is preparing 52 
hygiene kits for a multiservice outreach planned for 12 July at the covered sports centre. In addition, 
PAHO, the Regional Health Directorate, the University of Health Sciences, Cáritas Venezuela and 
CESAP completed training for 60 volunteers and students in psychological first aid (PFA) for shelter 
response. 
 In Nueva Esparta state, the Municipality of Arismendi deployed a comprehensive response plan for 
17 affected people, including children, youth and older people, who are currently staying with 
relatives. Assistance includes medical care, medicine distribution, psychosocial support, registration 
of host families and assessment of basic needs. 
 In Sucre state, a humanitarian corridor was activated between Sucre, Caracas and La Guaira to 
facilitate the safe return of people from Sucre, coordinated through the state collection centre located
OCHA | 4 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
at the Ely Montes Gymnasium (Félix “Lalito” Velásquez Sports Complex, Cumaná). The operation 
provides medical assistance, psychological support and logistical support. On 9 July, seven people 
were transported to Cumaná, including five to Bolívar Municipality and two to Cruz Salmerón Acosta 
Municipality, with support from Tinta Violeta and Cáritas Cumaná. To date, 641 people have been 
relocated within the state, of whom  187 returned independently and 454 with government support. 
The Governor’s Office also ur ged affected people to register in the official census, established a 
technical commission to assess the habitability of buildings and is evaluating the use of Cumaná 
Airport as a humanitarian aid reception hub. 
 In Trujillo state, regional authorities report the arrival of people affected by the earthquake from La 
Guaira and Caracas who have been relocated across 14 municipalities under a “temporary solidarity 
shelter” arrangement, receiving comprehensive assistance from joint commissions, including non-
perishable food, personal items, clothing, footwear and  medicines. Field monitoring by ODISEF 
indicates that the 32 families surveyed to date in Trujillo, Valera, San Rafael de Carvajal, Pampanito, 
Escuque, Sucre and Bolívar municipalities are staying with relatives. The Local Coordination Forum 
continues to monitor the situation and coordinate among actors to support a complementary 
response. 
 In Zulia state, the National Association of Child Protection Counsellors (ASONACOP) continues 
supporting displaced families at the Maracaibo passenger terminal. On 8 July, five family groups (11 
people, predominantly children and adolescents ) were assisted, including a woman who was six 
months pregnant and received support from the Red Cross. On 9 July, three additional family groups 
arriving from La Guaira and Caracas were assisted, with destinations in Maracaibo, Machiques and 
Táchira, as well as onward t ravel to Colombia (Maicao, Bogotá and Barranquilla). The terminal’s 
Citizen Assistance Unit provided hot meals, transportation support coordinated with community 
leaders, and hygiene and food kits, while ASONACOP delivered legal assistance and protection 
messaging. Cases of total housing loss were reported. The presence of humanitarian organizations 
at the terminal has expanded, with HIAS, CESVI, ASOREZ and Cáritas joining ASONACOP and the 
Red Cross to strengthen assistance and referral pathways for people on the move. 
 
Humanitarian coordination 
 The United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief 
Coordinator, Tom Fletcher, concluded his visit to Venezuela on Friday. In addition to meeting 
with affected people, humanitarian personnel and national authorities, he met with private 
sector leaders and representatives of the diplomatic community to discuss the transition 
from emergency response to recovery and reconstruction. He also called for continued 
support to the Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP) to help address the most urgent needs. 
 According to information reported by organizations, donors, government entities and other 
partners and reflected in the Who Does What Where infographic, the humanitarian response 
to the earthquakes has recorded 1,642 activities implemented by 88 organizations across 53 
municipalities. Most response activities have been concentrated in La Guaira, the Capital 
District and Miranda, particularly in the sectors of Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH), 
Health, Protection, Coordination and Food Security. 
 OCHA, together with the Humanitarian Coordinator and in coordination with national authorities, is 
coordinating the humanitarian response with the United Nations and partner organizations, 
prioritizing interventions in health, shelter, food assistance, wat er, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), 
logistics and protection. 
 The coordination of Urban Search and Rescue (USAR) operations was formally transferred to 
Venezuela’s Civil Protection, which will continue coordinating both national and international teams 
deployed in the affected areas. At the same time, international USAR teams have begun a gradual 
demobilization process.  
 Venezuelan authorities requested the activation of the Post -Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) 
within the framework of the United Nations system and with the support of UNDP. In line with the 
internationally recognized PDNA methodology, the corresponding coordination efforts with relevant 
counterparts will be advanced.
OCHA | 5 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 Authorities informed the activation of a special mechanism to expedite the processing of a “Work 
Visa for Special Situations” through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The procedure will be carried out 
online under the coordination of the Office of the Vice Minister for Multilateral Affairs and the Consular 
Affairs Office. It is intended for foreign personnel of international organizations, as well as United 
Nations staff, deploying to Venezuela in support of the response to the earthquake emergency.  
 
Initial humanitarian response 
Food Security 
 
 WFP continues scaling up its emergency food assistance, reaching affected populations through 
ready-to-eat rations, family food baskets, and hot meals. Since the start of the response, WFP 
has provided food assistance to 52,212 people. On July 10 alone, 4,241 individual ready-to-eat 
rations were distributed through implementing partners in the parishes of Coche, Macarao, Santa 
Rosalía, Santa Teresa, and Sucre in Libertador municipality, Capital District, ensuring immediate 
access to food for earthquake-affected households.  
 Additionally, 800 people received assistance through the distribution of 200 family food baskets in 
communities across San Pedro and Catia La Mar in La Guaira. The baskets contain maize meal, 
pasta, pulses, vegetable oil, and salt, covering approximately 75 percent of  household food 
requirements for 30 days. Furthermore, in partnership with World Central Kitchen, WFP provided 
7,148 hot meals (lunch and dinner) across three transitional camps (the José María Vargas Sports 
Stadium, the César Nieves Baseball Stadium, and the Playa Grande community) supporting the food 
needs of displaced and affected populations. 
 
Health 
 UNICEF supported the provision of health and nutrition services at Polideportivo Vargas transitional 
camp, where 129 medical consultations were conducted and vaccines from the emergency 
immunization schedule were administered. 
 In Playa Grande transitional camp, Project HOPE provided 43 medical consultations and seven 
psychological first aid (PFA) sessions for affected people. 
 At Polideportivo Vargas Transitional Camp, IOM supported the establishment of a physiotherapy unit 
in coordination with Humanity & Inclusion. 
 UNFPA provided sexual and reproductive health (SRH) services in Polideportivo Vargas, César 
Nieves Stadium and Playa Grande transitional camps, reaching 144 people through awareness -
raising activities on condom use and other SRH topics. In addition, four consultations were provided 
to pregnant women and access to contraceptive methods was facilitated. 
 IOM supported the implementation of 10 mobile health outreach activities at Polideportivo José 
María Vargas transitional camp, where 853 consultations have been provided to date through 
general medicine, paediatrics, gynaecology and obstetrics, internal medicine, psychology and 
psychological first aid (PFA) services. 
 International Medical Corps (IMC) continues to operate three Mobile Medical Units in La Guaira 
State, providing primary health care, sexual and reproductive health, and mental health and 
psychosocial support (MHPSS) services in affected communities. The organization has also begun 
deploying a Type 1 Emergency Medical Team (EMT) in Catia La Mar to strengthen health response 
capacity. Between 1 and 8 July, IMC’s mobile medical units conducted 944 consultations in affected 
communities. The main reasons for consultation were non- communicable diseases (44 per cent), 
communicable diseases (36 per cent), mental health and psychosocial support (8 per cent), sexual 
and reproductive health (7 per cent), and traumatic injuries (4 per cent). 
 The Government of Japan will deploy a second contingent of the Japan Disaster Relief (JDR) 
Medical Team to the affected area, comprising personnel from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), as well as registered doctors, nurses and other 
health professionals.
OCHA | 6 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
Logistics and Telecommunications 
 Simón Bolívar International Airport in Maiquetía received a UNHRD-organized flight carrying cargo 
for IOM, GOAL and UNICEF, transporting approximately 30 metric tons of shelter, housing and 
WASH supplies. In addition, a separate flight delivered nearly 9 metric tons of shelter and housing 
items for UNHCR. The Logistics Working Group supported coordination of both operations. 
 In the telecommunications sector, WFP conducted a field assessment of the area where a fourth 
WFP Mobile Storage Unit (MSU) will be established in Playa Verde to support the installation of 
Starlink-based internet communication systems. 
 Implementation of a community internet communications system also began, based on a design by 
Luxembourg.lu and with the support of WFP, CONATEL and the local internet service provider G-
Network. The system is expected to be operational by Monday and will cover the areas of 
Polideportivo Vargas, César Nieves Stadium and Playa Grande transitional camps. 
 
 Nutrition 
 UNICEF established a breastfeeding space at the Playa Grande transitional camp to provide privacy 
and appropriate conditions for breastfeeding mothers. 
 
 Protection (including Children and Gender-Based Violence) 
 UNHCR provided legal counselling, psychosocial support, referrals and assistance related to 
documentation and identity in the Polideportivo Vargas, César Nieves Stadium and Playa Grande 
transitional camps. Among other key actions, UNHCR also supported SAIME in establishing a 
service point at César Nieves transitional camp, facilitating the renewal of identity documents for 207 
people affected by the earthquakes. 
 At Playa Grande transitional camp, UNHCR coordinated with the ICRC to establish a Restoring 
Family Links point and carried out community support and psychosocial assistance activities. 
 IOM conducted activities on protection risk awareness, prevention of trafficking in persons, access 
to documentation and referrals to specialized services in the Playa Grande and Campo de Golf 
(Tanaguarena) transitional camps. 
 UNICEF provided psychosocial support, recreational activities, rights awareness and violence 
prevention for 82 children and adolescents in the Polideportivo Vargas, César Nieves Stadium and 
Playa Grande transitional camps. 
 UNFPA carried out gender -based violence (GBV) prevention and risk mitigation activities in the 
Polideportivo Vargas, César Nieves Stadium and Playa Grande transitional camps, reaching 135 
people through awareness -raising activities. In addition, UNFPA provided individual psychosocial 
support and psychological first aid (PFA) interventions and followed up on two protection cases. 
 At Playa Grande transitional camp, IOM conducted awareness-raising activities on protection risks 
and prevention of trafficking in persons (26), provided guidance on identity documentation (8), and 
referred people to available services, including health services (9). 
Shelter and Non-Food Items 
 At Polideportivo Vargas Transitional Camp, IOM supported the installation of 20 showers for women 
in coordination with the Ministry of Public Works and Infrastructure. 
 In addition to the three transitional camps in La Guaira currently supported by United Nations 
agencies and humanitarian partner organizations, the Mare Abajo transitional camp was activated, 
with capacity to accommodate approximately 1,300 people and prov ide services to an estimated 
3,000 people in surrounding communities. 
 Authorities announced the arrival of a shipment from Qatar containing 10 metric tons of logistics 
supplies and camp equipment to support the response. 
 
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH)  
 UNICEF maintained water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services in the Polideportivo Vargas, 
César Nieves Stadium and Playa Grande transitional camps, ensuring access to safe water,
OCHA | 7 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
sanitation facilities, handwashing points and hygiene kits. At Polideportivo Vargas and César Nieves, 
20,000 litres of water were distributed daily at each site, with support from the Ministry of Energy and 
other organizations in the latter camp, while Playa Grande received 10,000 litres of water through 
water trucking. 
 At Campo de Golf (Tanaguarena) transitional camp, IOM coordinated with All Hands and Hearts, 
Fundación Vivienda Popular, DRC and other partners to assess and strengthen WASH services, 
including the installation of additional showers and the planning of wat er storage and treatment 
solutions. 
 At Playa Grande Transitional Camp, Action Against Hunger (ACF) and other organizations supported 
the distribution of hygiene kits. CISP conducted hygiene promotion activities, distributed waste 
management supplies, refilled water containers and monitored sanitation conditions. 
Humanitarian financing and contributions  
 The United Nations humanitarian chief, Tom Fletcher, announced an additional appeal under 
the Humanitarian Response Plan for Venezuela. The appeal outlines the multisectoral needs 
of 1.3 million people over the next six months. To reach those in need, US$298  million is 
required, in addition to the US$632 million requested at the beginning of the year. 
 The Government of Japan allocated US$3.5 million to support the earthquake response. The 
funding will provide humanitarian assistance in key sectors, including food security, health 
care, shelter and non- food items, through WFP, the International Federation of Red Cross 
and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) and IOM. 
 The Royal Netherlands Navy delivered an additional shipment of humanitarian assistance 
and emergency relief supplies to La Guaira as part of a sustained support mechanism from 
Curaçao that has already facilitated five consecutive missions. A new vessel will be deployed 
to ensure the continuity of these operations and support the delivery of assistance to affected 
areas. 
 As part of the support provided by UNDAC, the team includes a private sector coordination specialist 
to strengthen business engagement in response and recovery efforts. A private sector contributions 
tracker for the Venezuela earthquake response is available at https://ven-
eq.connectingbusiness.org, together with a briefing note for the private sector outlining opportunities 
for engagement. Focal point: sanchez21@un.org.  
 The Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) allocated US$15 million to support a multisectoral 
response, alongside the activation of the Venezuela Humanitarian Fund (VHF). Norway contributed 
to support the response through CERF. 
 The United States  announced a US$100 million contribution to the VHF, in addition to a further 
US$100 million in bilateral funding for response operations implemented by IOM, WFP, UNICEF, 
International Medical Corps, Catholic Relief Services, Samaritan’s Purse, Proyecto Esperanza and 
the Red Cross. 
 Germany and the Republic of Korea contributed US$5 million and US$1.25 million, respectively, to 
the VHF to support humanitarian action in the country. Other Member States and donors have 
expressed their intention to support the response through the Fund.  
 IOM launched a US$98 million appeal to assist 850,000 people and support 140 entities over 
the next six months. PAHO/WHO launched an emergency appeal for nearly US$24 million to 
support health response and early recovery activities over the next six months and released US$1.5 
million from the Contingency Fund for Emergencies.  WFP launched an initial appeal for US$50 
million to scale up food assistance and support emergency logistics and communications activities. 
UNHCR requires US$14.8 million to support up to 30,000 affected people over the next six months. 
 The European Union allocated €5 million to support the emergency response, in addition to the €52 
million already allocated this year for humanitarian operations in the country. 
 Australia announced a US$2 million contribution to support the provision of food, shelter, healthcare 
and access to safe water through IFRC and WFP. 
 Switzerland announced a contribution of CHF 2.5 million to support the response. 
 Sweden allocated SEK 25 million to support the humanitarian response through food assistance, 
water, temporary shelter, protection and family reunification programmes implemented by WFP, 
UNHCR and Save the Children.
OCHA | 8 
 
 
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
www.unocha.org 
 Denmark announced an additional contribution of DKK 11 million to support the humanitarian 
response, including DKK 10 million through UNHCR and DKK 1 million through DanChurchAid and 
the Danish Red Cross. 
 The Disasters Emergency Committee (DEC) announced an initial allocation of £7.5 million for the 
earthquake response in Venezuela, including £2 million contributed by the United Kingdom 
Government through UK Aid Match. The funds will be implemented by DEC member agencies and 
their local partners to support the humanitarian response. 
 OCHA continues to coordinate with donors and partners to ensure rapid, strategic and needs-based 
allocation of resources. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact information 
For more information, please contact the OCHA Venezuela Office: 
 
Vanessa May – Head of Office a.i. – mayv@un.org  
Alfonso Zabaleta – Humanitarian Affairs Officer – alfonso.zabaleta@un.org  
Jennifer Moreno – Public Information Officer – moreno7@un.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Support the humanitarian response to address the earthquake in Venezuela 
Make your donation safely and quickly now: 
https://crisisrelief.un.org/en/donate-venezuela-crisis