In this photo released by the Iranian Presidency Office, President Masoud Pezeshkian, right, speaks with Pakistan's Army Chief Field Marshal Gen. Asim Munir in Tehran, Iran, Saturday, May 23, 2026.
                

                    
                    Iranian Presidency Office via AP/Iranian Presidency Office
                    
                


hide caption






toggle caption





        
        Iranian Presidency Office via AP/Iranian Presidency Office
        
    






ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — President Donald Trump said Saturday that a deal with Iran on the war, including opening the Strait of Hormuz, has been "largely negotiated" after calls with Israel and other allies in the region.
 
"Final aspects and details of the Deal are currently being discussed, and will be announced shortly," Trump said on social media, with no details. He said he had spoken with leaders from Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Pakistan, Turkey, Egypt, Jordan and Bahrain, and separately with Israel.
 
He described it as a "Memorandum of Understanding pertaining to PEACE" that still must be finalized by the United States, Iran and the other countries that participated in the calls. It capped a week in which the U.S. weighed a new round of attacks on the Islamic Republic that would break a fragile ceasefire.


There was no mention of Iran's nuclear program and highly enriched uranium, which Iran has sought to discuss later. There was no immediate comment from Iran or Israel. Trump said speaking with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who had pressed the U.S. to go to war, went "very well."
 
There had been growing optimism among officials
 
Earlier on Saturday, a regional official with direct knowledge of the Pakistan-led mediation efforts said the U.S. and Iran were closing in on a deal to end the war.
 
The official, speaking on condition of anonymity to discuss closed-door deliberations, cautioned that "last-minute disputes" could blow up the efforts. This is not the first time in recent weeks that a deal has been described as close.
 
The official said the deal would include an official declaration of the war's end, with two-month negotiations on Iran's nuclear program. The Strait of Hormuz would be reopened and the U.S. would end its blockade of Iran's ports.
 
Iran, meanwhile, had signaled "narrowing differences" in negotiations after Pakistani army chief Asim Munir held more talks in Tehran.
 
Twelve weeks have passed since the U.S. and Israel attacked Iran on Feb. 28, killing top Iranian officials including its supreme leader and interrupting nuclear talks between the U.S. and Iran for the second time in less than a year. Iran fired at Israel and at neighbors hosting U.S. forces, shaking Gulf nations that had considered themselves safe havens in a tough region.


A ceasefire has held since April 7. But Iran's decision to effectively close the Strait of Hormuz for ships carrying regional oil, natural gas and other critical supplies has been a focal point of global concern and economic pain.
 
Iran described it as a 'framework agreement' for more talks
 
Iran state TV earlier quoted Foreign Ministry spokesperson Esmail Baghaei as describing the draft as a "framework agreement" and adding: "We want this to include the main issues required for ending the imposed war and other issues of essential importance to us. Then, over a reasonable time span, between 30 to 60 days, details are discussed and ultimately a final agreement is reached."
 
He said the Strait of Hormuz is among the topics discussed.
 
But Baghaei told Iran's official IRNA news agency that nuclear issues are not part of current negotiations.
 
"Our focus at this stage is on ending the war on all fronts, including Lebanon," he said, adding that lifting sanctions on Tehran "has explicitly been included in the text and remains our fixed position."
 
The Iranian-backed Hezbollah's Al-Manar TV reported that the Lebanese militant group's leader received a letter from Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi saying Tehran will not abandon its allies. There is a fragile, U.S.-brokered ceasefire in the Israel-Hezbollah war in Lebanon, a conflict that began two days after the Iran war started.
 
Trump had said 'serious negotiations' were underway
 
Trump earlier said he was holding off on a military strike against Iran because "serious negotiations" were underway, and at the request of allies in the Middle East. Trump has repeatedly set deadlines for Tehran and then backed off.
 
Iran's parliament speaker, Mohammad Bagher Qalibaf, the lead negotiator in historic face-to-face talks with the U.S. last month in Islamabad, said Saturday that Iran has rebuilt its military assets and if Trump resumed attacks, the result would be "more crushing and more bitter" than at the start of the war.


State TV said he spoke after meeting with Pakistan's army chief Asim Munir, who also met with Araghchi, President Masoud Pezeshkian and other senior officials. Qatar sent a senior official to Tehran to support Pakistan's efforts.
 
The war's stated aims have not been achieved. Iran still has its enriched uranium and a missile program it says is being rebuilt. It continues to express support for armed proxies in the region. The new supreme leader, though still unseen publicly since the war began, is the son of the previous one and close to the powerful Revolutionary Guard.
 
And the Iranian people have not revolted against the government as both Trump and Netanyahu had predicted after nationwide protests early this year.