Organizations have seen an increase in the number of women migrants since 2025, and many are subjected to violence during their journey as well as in displacement in France.


Near the city of Dunkirk, 
France
, more than 1,000 displaced people are living in unsuitable and dangerous makeshift camps situated in the middle of an industrial site far from town centers.


Among them are a growing number of isolated women who are vulnerable to 
violence
, and are actively excluded from the French health care system. Isolated in remote areas of the camps, their access to health care services is limited, particularly for sexual and reproductive health. In response, Doctors Without Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) is providing these women with much-needed gynecological care and 
psychological support
 through weekly mobile clinics.


No security in tents with zippers as locks


Organizations working along the northern coastline have noticed an increase in the number of women migrants since 2025. Many of them have suffered 
repeated violence
 during their journeys, and are once again exposed to such dangers in France.


“Many of our patients find themselves in a state of psychological ambivalence, torn between the impossibility of giving up on crossing the Channel to reach the 
United Kingdom
 and the fear of dying,” says psychologist Victorine Sagot-Priez.


“These women are physically and mentally exhausted,” explains Nihal Osman, program coordinator for MSF France. “They spend their days searching for food and clothing or trying to find a tent, because every week the police evict them from the camps, forcing them to abandon any belongings they have.”




Many of our patients find themselves in a state of psychological ambivalence, torn between the impossibility of giving up on crossing the Channel to reach the United Kingdom and the fear of dying.




“There is a high level of overcrowding in the camps, and all the women are exposed to harassment,” adds Osman. “They live in tents in which the only lock is a zipper.”


“When a patient mentions her insomnia — as she must remain on alert all night because her tent’s zipper offers little protection — the shadows of a person or gunshots in the camp can trigger a traumatic memory from the past,” adds Sagot-Priez. “I sometimes meet women who are mentally exhausted and who describe their daily struggles, particularly with intrusive memories of rape they have suffered — experiences they have not yet been able to speak about. Care that includes a gynecological component, combined with a psychological approach, is particularly valuable, as it also enables healing through the body.”


MSF is helping to address this situation of displacement by providing emergency accommodations.


Repressive policies are driving exclusion


“Our project enables us to reach women who, barring life-threatening emergencies, face significant difficulties in accessing care,” says Camille Niel, head of MSF France. “The authorities refuse to adapt health care provision to the specific needs of people in transit. Drinking water points, showers and toilets, and a regular waste collection system were only put in place after six organizations filed an urgent application for interim relief with the Lille Administrative Court in November 2025.”




These women are physically and mentally exhausted. Every week the police evict them from the camps, forcing them to abandon any belongings they have.




“Patients often come to see me for 
prenatal care
 as their pregnancies haven’t been regularly monitored or monitored at all,” says MSF midwife Charlotte Thivoyon. “Some women need safe 
abortion
 care. Others talk to me about possible sexually transmitted infections, particularly after having suffered sexual violence. Yet regardless of their medical issue, the priority for these women is to find somewhere safe to sleep, somewhere to wash, something to eat, food for their children, or to obtain medication.”


In Calais, where MSF has been present since 2023, and now in the Dunkirk area, the evidence is irrefutable: 
Repressive policies
 implemented by the French authorities, with significant financial support from the British government, are causing ever greater exclusion and precariousness along the northern coast of France.


“Far from deterring migrants from traveling to the French coast in an attempt to reach the UK, these policies are creating humanitarian situations that are extremely worrying, yet largely avoidable,” concludes Niel.