24/05/2026 - 08:17






24/05/2026 - 08:15
Turkey ready to support potential Iran deal, Erdogan says


Turkey is ​ready to ​provide every kind of support during implementation ​of ‌a potential ⁠deal with Iran, President ‌Tayyip Erdogan said in ⁠a call with US President Donald ​Trump and ‌regional leaders.
Erdogan’s office cited ‌him as saying ​during the call that an agreement to secure ​free passage ​through the ​Strait of Hormuz would support ​stability in the region, providing relief to the global ⁠economy.






24/05/2026 - 07:40






24/05/2026 - 06:48
Axios says proposed US-Iran deal involves opening strait during 60-day ceasefire extension


The ​US and Iran are close to signing a deal involving ​a 60-day ceasefire extension, during which the Strait of Hormuz would be reopened, Iran would be able to freely sell oil ​and ‌negotiations would be held on curbing Iran’s ⁠nuclear program, Axios reported, citing a US official.
According to the Axios ‌report, during the 60-day period, the Strait of Hormuz ⁠would be open with no tolls and Iran would agree to clear the mines it deployed in ​the strait to let ships pass freely.
In ‌exchange, as part of the proposed deal, the US would lift its blockade on Iranian ports and issue some sanctions waivers ‌to allow Iran to sell oil freely.
The draft agreement ​also includes commitments from Iran to never pursue nuclear weapons and to negotiate over a suspension of its uranium enrichment ​program and the removal of its stockpile of highly ​enriched uranium, the Axios report said.






24/05/2026 - 06:42
Iran executes person accused of sending information to US, Israel during war


Iran ​has executed a person for charges related to ​sending ‌information ⁠to ‌the United States and Israel during ⁠the war, the ​Iranian judiciary’s ‌Mizan news agency reported.
The ​individual, identified as Mojtaba Kian, was ​sending ​data about Iran’s ​defence industry ​to “the enemy”, according to the news ⁠agency.






24/05/2026 - 05:06
Israeli strike destroys Lebanon civil defence centre in Nabatieh


Lebanon’s civil defence agency said early on Sunday its regional facility in the southern city of Nabatieh had been destroyed by an Israeli strike.
The Directorate General of Civil Defence said the building had collapsed and a large number of vehicles and equipment had been damaged by a “direct hit in a hostile Israeli strike”.
It added there were no reports of casualties among its personnel, who had been moved to another location before the incident.
The civil defence agency condemned “this attack on a centre dedicated to humanitarian and relief work”, stressing that it was facing “growing risks and challenges” in carrying out its operations.






24/05/2026 - 05:05
Trump says deal with Iran has been 'largely negotiated'


A “largely negotiated” memorandum of understanding on an Iran peace deal would reopen the Strait of Hormuz, US President Donald Trump said on Saturday, although the Iranian Fars news agency disputed that claim.
Trump posted on social media that the emerging agreement would reopen the strait, the vital shipping passage whose closure upended global energy markets ​after the conflict started in ‌February when the US and Israel launched strikes on Iran. He did not say what else would be included in ⁠an agreement.
﻿“Final aspects and details of the Deal are currently being discussed, and will be announced shortly,” Trump wrote on Truth Social.






24/05/2026 - 05:04
Pakistan offers to host next Iran-US peace talks 'very soon'


Pakistan's Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif said on Sunday he hoped his country could soon host the next round of peace talks between Iran and the United States.
"Pakistan will continue its peace efforts with utmost sincerity and we hope to host the next round of talks very soon," Sharif, whose country has played a key role in mediating between Washington and Tehran, posted on X.






24/05/2026 - 05:03
 
Welcome to the France 24 liveblog covering events in the Middle East! Catch up on yesterday's news 
here
.