Photo Caption & Credit: Mr Tetsuya Murakami, Counsellor at 
the Embassy of Japan in Zimbabwe, observes sesame marketing 
at a Village Business Unit in Chipinge. WFP/Tinashe Mubaira 
Reporting Period: June 2026 
 
 
WFP Zimbabwe 
COUNTRY BRIEF 
June 2026 
 
 
10,211 people assisted in May 2026 
(53 percent female) 
 
150 mt food distributed in May 2026 
 
USD 70,260 cash transferred in May 2026 
 
USD 41.7 M required in the next six 
months (June- November 2026) 
KEY HIGHLIGHTS 
• WFP Zimbabwe and the Embassy of Japan, 
represented by Mr. Tetsuya Murakami, Counsellor, 
conducted a joint field mission to Chipinge to 
review progress under Japan’s USD 5 million 
support for smallholder farmer and sesame value 
chain development. The mission highlighted gains 
in resilient food systems, market access and 
improved livelihoods for participating 
communities.  
• Forecasts from the World Meteorological 
Organisation (WMO) indicate potential El Niño 
conditions from September 2026 to February 
2027. The phenomenon, which is expected to 
affect Southern Africa, is likely to impact 
Zimbabwe’s 2026/2027 agricultural season 
through below-average rainfall, prolonged dry 
spells, reduced crop production and heightened 
food insecurity risks for vulnerable households. 
SITUATION OVERVIEW 
• Zimbabwe is closely monitoring forecasts from 
the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) 
and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA), which indicate the 
potential for El Niño conditions during the 
2026/2027 agricultural season. While more 
localised and detailed forecasts from the 
National Climate Outlook Forum are expected in 
August, the Government of Zimbabwe, 
supported by WFP and partners, is enhancing 
preparedness through anticipatory action, 
climate risk monitoring, early warning systems 
and contingency planning to safeguard food 
security, protect livelihoods and reduce the 
impact of potential climate-related shocks on 
vulnerable communities. 
• Zimbabwe continues to face intersecting climatic 
and structural pressures that are driving food 
insecurity and livelihood stress. Recurrent 
climate shocks have disrupted agricultural 
production, increasing vulnerability in both rural 
and urban areas. 
• Through its 2022–2026 Country Strategic Plan, 
WFP Zimbabwe is delivering life‑saving food and 
nutrition assistance while scaling up 
resilience‑building efforts and strengthening 
early warning and social protection systems. At 
the same time, WFP is investing in government 
capacity to lead and ultimately assume full 
ownership of programme delivery, while 
partnering with the private sector to accelerate 
progress towards Zero Hunger.
WFP Zimbabwe Country Brief 
June 2026 
 PAGE 2 
Contact Info:  wfp.zimrepresentative@wfp.org 
Country Director: Barbara Clemens  
OPERATIONAL UPDATES 
General Food Assistance  
• In May, WFP assisted 10,200 refugees residing at 
Tongogara Refugee Camp with food assistance. 
The support package included specialised 
nutritious products for children under five years 
of age, as well as for pregnant and breastfeeding 
women and people with chronic illnesses, to 
help meet their specific nutritional needs and 
improve overall health outcomes. 
 
Social Protection 
• WFP Zimbabwe continues to strengthen national 
social protection systems, including through its 
engagement in the ongoing review of the 
National Social Protection Policy Framework 
(NSPPF) and the National Social Protection 
Strategy. As part of this process, in May, WFP 
participated in the NSPPF validation process, 
contributing technical expertise and operational 
insights. This engagement helps ensure that the 
revised frameworks are responsive to emerging 
vulnerabilities, promote shock‑responsive social 
protection, and enhance coordination across 
stakeholders, ultimately supporting more 
effective and inclusive assistance for vulnerable 
populations. It also strengthens the 
Government’s capacity to progressively take 
over the implementation of Lean Season 
Assistance (LSA) during protracted and 
predictable periods of food insecurity, an 
approach expected to be tested during the 2027 
LSA response. 
• WFP Zimbabwe also participated in the national 
workshop to validate the Zimbabwe Social 
Registry Manual, a key tool for harmonizing 
programme implementation across 
development partners. The Social Registry will 
strengthen targeting, improve efficiency and 
transparency in beneficiary selection, and 
support better coordination of social protection 
interventions, ultimately enhancing the delivery 
of assistance to vulnerable populations. 
 
Resilience and Livelihood Support 
• WFP Zimbabwe and the Embassy of Japan, 
represented by Mr. Tetsuya Murakami, 
Counsellor, conducted a field mission to 
Chipinge district to review progress under 
Japan’s USD 5 million contribution provided in 
2024. The funding, which runs through 
November 2027, supports the strengthening of 
food systems through the development of the 
sesame value chain using a farm-to-fork 
approach, linking smallholder farmers to 
markets, including Japanese companies as off-
takers and the Japanese domestic market as an 
export market.  
• The mission reviewed key achievements under 
the Integrated Rural Resilience Building 
programme, highlighting strong partnerships 
with government departments at grassroots 
level to provide technical support and sustain 
results. Collaboration with the private sector is 
also reinforcing the SHEP (Smallholder 
Horticulture Empowerment and Promotion) 
approach by facilitating access to structured 
markets, notably for chilli and sesame destined 
for export. The mission further showcased 
progress along the sesame value chain, where 
smallholder farmers are increasingly accessing 
reliable markets, including sales to SES Africa, 
another Japan‑supported partner.  The mission 
highlighted strong progress in resilience 
building, market access, strengthened 
livelihoods and improved nutrition outcomes 
among participating rural communities. 
Youth Empowerment and Livelihoods 
Programme 
• In 2025, WFP Zimbabwe enrolled its first cohort 
of 10 youth under its inaugural Youth 
Empowerment and Livelihoods Programme 
(YELP), marking a new milestone in its resilience 
and livelihoods portfolio to address youth 
unemployment and vulnerability. The 
programme focuses on boosting skills 
development, leadership, and meaningful youth 
participation to tackle unemployment and 
unlock new economic opportunities. In May, 
YELP interns participated in post-harvest 
management training, strengthening their 
capacity to engage in local food systems and 
livelihoods activities. By equipping young people 
with market‑relevant competencies and 
strengthening their engagement in local 
economies, YELP is expected to enhance
WFP Zimbabwe Country Brief 
June 2026 
 PAGE 3 
Contact Info:  wfp.zimrepresentative@wfp.org 
Country Director: Barbara Clemens  
self‑reliance, promote innovation, and 
contribute to improved livelihoods and food 
security among Zimbabwe’s youth.  
Sharing our story 
• In May, WFP Zimbabwe launched the second 
episode of its podcast, Bites of Change, an 
innovative platform designed to strengthen 
accountability to the communities and people 
WFP serves while broadening stakeholder 
engagement for the development of the Country 
Strategic Plan (2027–2031). Through 
conversations with WFP staff, partners, experts 
and community voices, the podcast explores 
food security, nutrition and development 
challenges, shows locally driven solutions, and 
creates space for stakeholders to share their 
perspectives and experiences. With two 
episodes now produced (Episode 1, Episode 2), 
Bites of Change serves as both an advocacy and 
knowledge-sharing tool, inviting audiences to 
join the conversation and contribute to 
Zimbabwe's development journey through 
shared insights from partners and communities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FUNDING OVERVIEW  
Country Strategic Plan (2022-2026) 
 
 
 
Donors 
Africa Development Bank, ARC, CERF, European 
Commission through ECHO, Germany, Japan, Korea, 
LDS, Russia, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United 
States of America, WFP’s Emerging Donors Matching 
Fund, Zimbabwe (in alphabetical order). 
FOLLOW US ON 
 @WFP_Zimbabwe 
 
USD108.0 
MUSD5.88 M
USD41.67 
M
2026 COUNTRY
PORTFOLIO
6-MONTHS NET
FUNDING
REQUIREMENTS
REQUIREMENT FUNDED