Good morning. Yesterday 
Keir Starmer
 published the defence investment plan (Dip), which was probably the last substantial announcement of his premiership. Today he is facing what will probably be his second last PMQs (he is expected to be at the Nato summit next Wednesday, and he’ll have his swansong on 15 July), and the session is likely to be dominated by complaints about the Dip.
Broadly, there are three distinct criticisms.
1) ‘It doesn’t raise defence spending by anything like enough.’
 This is what military chiefs (in private) and retired military leaders (on TV) have been saying for ages. Yesterday the 
Institute for Fiscal Studies
 in effect agreed. In a briefing, it said the rise in defence spending under Labour had been “substantial”. But the problem is that last year, 
under pressure from Donald Trump
, Keir Starmer and other Nato leaders committed 
to raising defence spending to 3.5% of GDP by 2035
 and, 
as the IFS explains
, despite the increase announced yesterday, there is as yet no credible path to get there.
2) ‘It is not even properly funded.’
 As 
Kiran Stacey 
and
 Dan Sabbagh
 explain in the Guardian’s splash story, the Dip amounts to a £15bn spending increase – but there is as yet no explanation as to where the money will come from to fund almost £5bn of this.
That is a problem for 
Andy Burnham
, who was not briefed on the black hole ahead of the publication of the Dip yesterday, and for his chancellor. Last night 
Liam Fox
, the former Tory defence secretary, said that Starmer was leaving a “poisoned chalice” for his successor.
3) ‘And the bits that are funded are in part funded by cuts that are not popular.’
 Some of the Dip is being funded by the cancellation of road projects, and this has angered Labour MPs whose constituencies are affected. 
Hamish Falconer
 is a Foreign Office minister, and normally ministers don’t criticise government decisions in public. But he is also MP for Lincoln and last night he posted
 a message
 on social media saying he was “disappointed” by the threat to the A46 Newark bypass widening scheme. In the Commons 
Jonathan Davies
, MP for Mid Derbyshire, said shelving the A38 Derby Junctions scheme would be “a brake on economic growth”. And last night 
Claire Ward
, the Labour mayor for the East Midlands, complained her region was disproportionately affected. She told the the Cathy Newman Show on Sky:


double quotation mark
What I’m complaining about today is that the East Midlands would appear to be the only region that has been told it is sacrificing its road investments programme in order to be able to contribute to the Dip.


Here is the agenda for the day.
9.30am:
 MPs hold a debate in Westminster Hall on the case for banning MPs from having second jobs.
Morning:
 Dan Jarvis, the defence secretary, is on a visit in Cambridgeshire.
Noon:
 Keir Starmer faces 
Kemi Badenoch
 at PMQs.
2.15pm:
 Police chiefs give evidence to the joint committee on human rights on the policing of protests.
If you want to contact me, please post a message below the line when comments are open (between 10am and 3pm), or message me on social media. I can’t read all the messages BTL, but if you put “Andrew” in a message aimed at me, I am more likely to see it because I search for posts containing that word.
If you want to flag something up urgently, it is best to use social media. You can reach me on Bluesky at @andrewsparrowgdn.bsky.social. The Guardian has 
given up posting from its official accounts on X
, but individual Guardian journalists are there, I still have my account, and if you message me there at @AndrewSparrow, I will see it and respond if necessary.
I find it very helpful when readers point out mistakes, even minor typos. No error is too small to correct. And I find your questions very interesting too. I can’t promise to reply to them all, but I will try to reply to as many as I can, either BTL or sometimes in the blog.