Several US media outlets report that an anonymous source from the US Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) leaked internal information indicating that the 
Pentagon
 has elevated Israel to the highest category of counterintelligence threat. The change was reportedly made due to significantly expanded intelligence activities against the US. Officially, Washington has denounced the reports, and Israel has dismissed the allegations as "completely false."


However, the allegations are still causing a stir in 
Washington
 as Israel is considered one of the closest partners of the 
US
. At the same time, these reports highlight a decades-old issue: mutual distrust regarding intelligence activities carried out by strategic allies. Ultimately, though, the real cause could be something entirely different.


Historic distrust


In 
Germany
, the news brings to mind a remark made by then-Chancellor 
Angela Merkel
 in 2013 after it became known that the US National Security Agency (NSA) had been monitoring her cell phone: "
Spying on friends
 is never acceptable," Merkel said at the time. Shortly thereafter, however, it became known that the German foreign intelligence service, the BND, had also been spying on allied countries, governments and institutions 
for decades.


German intelligence expert Erich Schmidt-Eenboom is convinced that even friendly nations spy on one another regularly. In his view, this applies especially to the US and Israel. "There have been repeated 
Mossad operations
 in the United States as part of the fight against international terrorism that were not coordinated with the FBI. Conversely, Israel has always been an interesting target for the National Security Agency's electronic surveillance, especially during all wars," he said.
The NSA in the US, and the Mossad in Israel have been spying on each other for decades
Image: NSA/dpa/picture alliance 


Israeli espionage against the United States


Probably the most prominent case of Israeli espionage in the United States to date is that of Jonathan Pollard in 1987. Working as a US Navy intelligence analyst, Pollard passed information to Israeli handlers and, according to 
The Times of Israel,
  received tens of thousands of US dollars in return.


After his confession, he was sentenced to life in prison in the US. However, leading Israeli politicians repeatedly 
advocated
 for Pollard until he was released from prison in 2015 under certain conditions. When Pollard was 
allowed to leave
 for Israel in 2020, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu personally greeted him at the airport. "That was quite an insult to the Americans," Schmidt-Eenboom told DW.


In 2004, it became known that Lawrence Franklin, a political analyst at the US Department of Defense, had passed on confidential information about US policy toward Iran to Israel via the 
influential pro-Israel
 lobbying organization AIPAC. Israel and AIPAC deny this, but Franklin was nevertheless convicted of espionage.


In the wake of the Snowden affair in 2013, Israeli espionage in the US was not a prominent issue. However, the British daily newspaper 
The Guardian
 mentioned in passing that, according to one of the documents leaked by whistleblower 
Edward Snowden
, an "NIE [National Intelligence Estimate] ranked them as the third-most aggressive intelligence service against the US."
Edward Snowden became famous for leaking documents that exposed the NSA's surveillance of millions of people
Image: Pedro Fiuza/dpa/picture alliance


US counterintelligence against allies


The Snowden leaks made headlines because they exposed the NSA and other US intelligence agencies' indiscriminate surveillance of millions of people. The documents also revealed the 
close cooperation
 between the NSA and the intelligence services of friendly nations, as well as that the US was also spying on its allies. Those affected included then-German Chancellor Angela Merkel as well as French Presidents 
Jacques Chirac
, 
Nicolas Sarkozy
 and 
Francois Hollande
.


In 2023, leaked Pentagon documents suggested that US intelligence agencies had monitored internal talks held by the 
South Korean
 government. Both sides denied this and jointly announced that the documents were largely forged, without specifying details on which meetings.


Why is the latest case so contentious?


It is largely undisputed that the latest controversy should be viewed against the backdrop of the joint 
US-Israel war with Iran
 and the strained relationship between 
Donald Trump
 and 
Benjamin Netanyahu.
 While the US president is apparently trying to resolve the conflict as quickly as possible, Netanyahu is, in Trump's eyes, 
doing too little
 to end the war. 


According to various assessments, Israel may indeed have crossed a red line by monitoring high-ranking government officials including US Special Envoy Steve Witkoff and several officials from the US Department of Defense who are familiar with US negotiations with Iran.


If true, the reclassification could be seen as a crisis of confidence between Washington and Israel. The question remains, however, as to why the information has now become public.


For Erich Schmidt-Eenboom, it is irrelevant whether the information is true or not. He is convinced that it was released in consultation with the US government. Trump is looking for ways to put diplomatic pressure on 
Israel
.


"Given the 
midterms
 in November, however, he cannot afford to antagonize the Israeli lobby in the US, for example by simply cutting military aid to Israel," he said. Under the impression that Israel is massively violating US interests with counterintelligence, this could be much easier. "Now the US president has the opportunity to exert pressure on Israel to halt the 
bombings and withdraw troops
 from southern Lebanon," the intelligence expert told DW.


This article was originally published in German.