Fuel and fertilizer price increases compound delayed primera planting 
Key Messages 
Honduras - Key Message Update May - September 2026 
Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes remain widespread across 
Honduras, with Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes emerging in 
the Dry Corridor between June and September as above-
average prices, below-average labor demand, and previous 
harvest losses exacerbate seasonal trends. While many 
households continue to meet minimum food needs through 
market purchases, they are struggling to cover essential non-
food expenditures amid below-average seasonal agricultural 
labor opportunities and are increasingly relying on coping 
strategies such as selling small livestock and borrowing. In the 
Dry Corridor, households negatively impacted by multiple poor 
agricultural seasons are likely to resort to more severe coping 
strategies at the height of the lean season. The rest of the 
country will experience Stressed (IPC Phase 2), while urban 
centers including Tegucigalpa (Francisco Morazán), La Esperanza 
(Intibucá), and the Bay Islands remain in Minimal (IPC Phase 1) 
due to more stable formal and informal income sources.  
Above-average fuel and fertilizer prices continue to drive 
high production and transportation costs for a second 
consecutive month. In April, diesel prices remained nearly 34 
percent higher than March, 64 percent higher than last year, and 
49 percent higher than the five-year average. Fertilizer prices 
have also remained elevated, with DAP (18-46-0) and urea rising 
to 7.2 and 50 percent higher than March, respectively, and 21.2 
and 45.1 percent above the five-year average, respectively. These 
rising input costs contributed to inflation surpassing the 5 
percent threshold in April.  
Staple food costs persist above last year and the five-year 
average despite relatively stable month-on-month prices, 
driven by weak domestic production. In April, wholesale white 
maize prices were 49.2 and 39.8 percent higher than last year 
and the five-year average, respectively, reflecting increased 
demand and lingering effects of below-average import volumes 
in 2025. Wholesale red bean prices are 10 percent above the 
five-year average but remained stable month-on-month and 
year-on-year, partly supported by increased bean availability due 
to crop substitution of maize for beans during primera 2025 and 
improved import volumes. While increased remittance inflows 
in early 2026 are helping receiving households partially offset higher food costs, most poor households do not 
receive remittances and remain vulnerable to price increases. 
Recent rainfall estimates through mid-May indicate widespread below-average precipitation across 
FEWS NET is a United States Government-funded activity. The content of this report does not
necessarily reflect the view of the United States Government.
FEWS NET Honduras
lac@fews.net
fews.net/latin-america-and-caribbean/honduras
Recommended citation: FEWS NET. Honduras Key Message Update May - September 2026: Fuel and fertilizer price increases 
compound delayed primera planting, 2026. 
Key Message Update 
This Key Message Update provides a high-level analysis of current acute food insecurity conditions and any changes to FEWS NET's latest projection of acute food insecurity outcomes 
in the specified geography. Learn more here. 
Honduras, negatively impacting primera land preparation and planting in localized areas. While some 
localized rainfall has met thresholds for planting requirements, much of this precipitation has been 
concentrated within short periods (2-3 days), limiting soil moisture adequacy and leading many farmers to 
postpone planting until more consistent rainfall is established. As a result, smallholders are not expected to 
initiate primera planting until mid-May. At the same time, elevated input costs are constraining fertilizer use by 
smallholder farmers, likely contributing to expected below-average primera crop yields by August. The 
Secretariat of Agriculture and Livestock (SAG), in coordination with agroclimatology boards and with support 
from the Centro de Estudios Atmosféricos, Oceanográficos y Sísmicos (CENAOS)/Comisión Permanente de 
Contingencias (COPECO), is monitoring and guiding planting decisions across the country.  
The forecast transition to El Niño is expected to result in rainfall deficits and above-average 
temperatures through September, particularly in the Dry Corridor, reducing vegetation health and soil 
moisture and disrupting crop development throughout the primera season. While the magnitude of the El 
Niño event remains uncertain, CENAOS has issued region-specific guidance for farmers, recommending early 
planting (before May 10) in the Dry Corridor areas bordering El Salvador, and slightly later planting (after May 
15) in central and eastern departments. Drought-prone areas, including southern Francisco Morazán, El Paraíso, 
Valle, Choluteca, and southern Comayagua, are likely to experience larger rainfall deficits. SAG is advising some 
farmers to prioritize planting red beans instead of white maize due to its short production cycle and lower water 
requirements, improving crop resilience under uncertain rainfall conditions.  
* FEWS NET classification is IPC-compatible with limited exceptions. IPC-compatible analysis follows key IPC protocols but does not necessarily reflect the consensus of national food security 
partners. As of IPC 3.0, the IPC no longer assesses the impact of food assistance on classification and thus no longer maps the (!). However, FEWS NET continues to produce food security 
maps inclusive of the (!) as well as maps compatible with IPC 3.0/3.1, which include the mapping of food security assistance bags. In rare cases, FEWS NET classification is IPC-aligned but 
not IPC-compatible. IPC-aligned analysis is evidence-based but some types of evidence required for IPC-compatibility were not available. 
Key Message Update May - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 2