Humanitarian Coordinator for Ukraine, Matthias Schmale, condemns a large-scale wave of Russian attacks on Kharkiv and Kyiv


Overnight, large-scale attacks by the Russian Federation Armed Forces once again brought further loss, fear and destruction to Kharkiv and Kyiv, Ukraine's most populated cities.


For millions of people across the country, the night was marked by hours of air raid sirens and terrifying sounds of explosions. Fires broke out in residential areas, and several civilians were reported dead, with scores more, including children, injured in Kyiv and Kharkiv. First responders and rescuers were also reportedly killed and injured while responding to the previous strike in Kharkiv. Overnight and through the weekend, additional civilians were also killed or injured by hostilities in the Kyiv region and along front-line areas.


This latest wave of attacks adds to the ongoing trend of increased harm to civilians. In May 2026, the Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine 
verified 
the highest monthly number of civilian casualties since April 2022.


Attacks damaged homes, schools and other civilian premises, including the grounds of the Kyiv Pechersk Lavra, a UNESCO World Heritage Site and one of Ukraine's most significant religious and cultural landmarks. The strikes also damaged an art museum in Kharkiv.


Beyond the loss and destruction, these strikes on the sites of Ukraine's history and culture are seen by many as attacks on the country's history and spirit. International humanitarian law provides special protection to cultural and religious sites, as attacks affecting them deprive communities of a shared heritage and a sense of belonging.


International humanitarian law is clear: civilians, including first responders, and civilian infrastructure must be protected. Homes, civilian objects, including cultural heritage sites, must be safeguarded.


For further information, please contact:
 Viktoriia Andriievska, OCHA: +380 50 419 6323, viktoriia.andriievska@un.org