The International Stabilisation Force for Gaza was announced at the inaugural meeting of US President Donald Trump's Board of Peace in February but three months on, none of the five countries that pledged troops have come through with any significant contributions.










ADVERTISEMENT














ADVERTISEMENT








Efforts to shore up the fragile ceasefire between Israel and the Gaza-based militant group Hamas have stalled, with Hamas refusing to disarm and Israel continuing to strike what it says are militant targets, often killing civilians.


Meanwhile, the Iran war has made it more difficult for Arab and Muslim leaders to openly cooperate with the United States and Israel, which many in the region view as aggressors and the resulting global energy crisis has put a strain on their resources.


The biggest blow to the planned force came about a week after the US and Israel attacked Iran on 28 February, when Indonesia put its commitment of 8,000 troops on indefinite hold.


Some 1,000 were to have been sent in April, followed by the remainder in June.


Indonesia's pledge was by far the largest of the group, which also includes Morocco, Kazakhstan, Kosovo and Albania. US Major General Jasper Jeffers, who spoke at the Board of Peace event, was to command the force.


Indonesia suspended its plans over what Defence Minister Sjafrie Sjamsoeddin said last week seemed to be a lack of commitment from a distracted Washington, saying “we have not yet received any implementation guidelines.”


“New dynamics have emerged,” he told parliament. “Because the intensity of the conflict between US and Iranian forces remains very high, the BoP has tended to be left behind. Since the BoP has been left behind, the ISF has also been left behind.”


Domestic issues may have factored into Indonesia's decision, said Muhammad Zulfikar Rakhmat, director of the Indonesia-Middle East/North Africa desk at Jakarta's Centre for Economic and Law Studies.


The Iran war is extremely unpopular in Indonesia, the world’s most populous Muslim country. The economy is suffering from soaring prices as a result of the conflict and there is widespread scepticism about the Board of Peace.


“If you talk to the people on the street, I don’t think they believe that the Board of Peace will actually help the people of Gaza,” Rakhmat said. There are also concerns about sending troops to the Middle East when the economy is faltering, he added.


Indonesia lost four peacekeepers who were part of the United Nations mission in Lebanon during fighting between Israel and Iran-backed Hezbollah. That has further soured public opinion on such international commitments, he said.


Forces committed but none known to be deployed


Kazakhstan has said its support for the stabilisation force would be limited to “the humanitarian component,” including sending medical units with a field hospital. Its Foreign Ministry did not respond to a request for comment.


Albania's Defence Ministry also declined to comment on its troop commitment, saying it was a “dynamic and ongoing process.”


Earlier this month, its chief of staff Lieutenant General Arben Kingji told reporters that while the military had “participated in reconnaissance activities,” no troops had yet been sent. 


He said only a few would be dispatched as part of the stabilisation force headquarters, without giving numbers, adding that further contributions would be considered.


Kosovo, which is expected to send 20 troops, said in April that it was in the “final phase of preparations.” The Defence Ministry did not reply to a request for an update.


Morocco's Foreign Ministry also did not reply. At the inaugural meeting of the Board of Peace, Foreign Minister Nasser Bourita said it would deploy “high-level military officers to the joint military command of the ISF.”


Board of Peace blames stalled ceasefire on Hamas


The US military’s Central Command declined to comment or make Jeffers available for an interview, referring all queries to the Board of Peace.


Board of Peace spokesperson Brad Klapper also declined to comment on Indonesia's decision or the future of the force, pointing instead to 21 May remarks at the UN by Nickolay Mladenov, a former Bulgarian defence minister who Trump appointed as the board’s director.


Mladenov said the international force would not be able to begin operations until there was agreement and implementation of a second phase of the ceasefire, which would see Hamas disarm and Israel begin to withdraw. Israeli troops control some 60% of Gaza.


Mladenov has blamed the deadlock on Hamas, saying its disarmament is “non-negotiable” and is holding up progress on other fronts, including Israel's withdrawal and reconstruction.


“You cannot build a future with armed groups running the streets, hiding in tunnels and stockpiling weapons,” Mladenov said in Jerusalem this month.


“You cannot deliver reconstruction with militias on every corner.”


Hamas blames delays on Israel


Hamas says Israel has repeatedly violated the ceasefire, holding up its further implementation, and has accused Mladenov of siding with Israel.


Israeli strikes have killed more than 880 Palestinians since the ceasefire, according to local health officials. Israel says it was responding to violations of the truce.


Hamas is also demanding Israel withdraw from areas seized since the start of the ceasefire, according to an Egyptian official with knowledge of the discussions, speaking on condition of anonymity to discuss closed-door talks. Egypt has long served as a mediator with Hamas.


Many of the countries that have pledged forces have refused to send troops without a deal on Hamas disarming, the official said.