12/07/2026 - 10:01
 Mojtaba Khamenei: Iran supreme leader vows revenge for father's killing


Iran's supreme leader Mojtaba Khamenei on Saturday vowed revenge for the US-Israeli killing of his father and predecessor, hours after President Donald Trump warned against any attempt to assassinate him.






12/07/2026 - 09:20
US attacks Iran over ship being hit in Strait of Hormuz


The United States attacked Iran early Sunday morning over an Iranian strike on a vessel in the Strait of Hormuz that set the container ship ablaze and forced its crew to abandon it. 
A projectile is fired during what the US Central Command (CENTCOM) said was a third round of strikes this week against Iran, in this screen grab taken from a handout video released on July 11, 2026. © US Central Command Handout via Reuters






12/07/2026 - 09:15
One Indian national missing after attack on vessel off Oman, foreign ministry says


One ⁠Indian national ​is missing after ​an attack on the commercial vessel GFS Galaxy off the ​coast ‌of Oman earlier ⁠on Sunday, the Ministry ‌of External Affairs said.
"Of the ⁠11 Indian nationals on board, 10 have ​been rescued so far, ‌while one Indian National is reportedly missing," ‌the ministry said, while condemning the ​attack.
India's embassy in Oman is closely monitoring the situation, and ​coordinating with the ​Omani authorities in ​the ongoing search and rescue operation, ​the ministry added.
Iran said earlier it had firing a warning shot ⁠that struck a vessel traveling on ⁠an ​unapproved route.






12/07/2026 - 09:07
Iranian drones have struck some sites in Oman, the sultanate's state news agency reports


The Omani state news agency said drones struck sites in northeastern Oman in the region that sits on the Strait of Hormuz.
Iran had previously claimed attacks on Oman, which the sultanate did not acknowledge.






12/07/2026 - 08:37
Sirens activated in Bahrain, says Ministry of Interior






12/07/2026 - 08:35
Jordan army says three Iranian missiles fell inside country






12/07/2026 - 08:35
Pakistan FM calls for 'restraint' in call with Iran counterpart, ministry says


Pakistan's top diplomat called for "de-escalation" and for parties in the Iran conflict to "show restraint" during a phone call with his Iranian counterpart, a foreign ministry statement said.
"Both leaders exchanged views on the evolving regional situation," Pakistan's foreign ministry said in a statement after the call between Ishaq Dar and Abbas Araghchi.
 Dar "further underscored that dialogue and diplomacy remain the only viable path to resolving disputes and achieving lasting peace and stability in the region", it said.
Pakistan's Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif (3L), President Asif Ali Zardari (2R), Foreign Minister Ishaq Dar (2L) and Interior Minister Mohsin Naqvi (3R) walking alongside Iran's President Masoud Pezeshkian (C) and Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi (R) upon their arrival at the Nur Khan Air Base in Rawalpindi. 
© 
Pakistan Prime Minister's Office, AFP






12/07/2026 - 07:09
Kuwait armed forces responding to aerial attacks


 Kuwait's military said its air defence forces were working to intercept an ongoing attack on its territory, as countries across the Gulf were targeted by drones and missiles. 
"The General Staff of the Army notes that any explosion sounds heard are the result of air defence systems intercepting hostile attacks," the military said in a statement posted on social media.






12/07/2026 - 07:07
Iran Guards say struck second vessel in Strait of Hormuz, says state media


The Iranian Revolutionary Guards announced they had hit a second vessel in the Strait of Hormuz, state media reported, after closing the key waterway and trading strikes with the United States.
"A second vessel accused of violating regulations in the Strait of Hormuz has been struck," the Guards said in a statement carried by state television IRIB, adding they had also attacked a US base in Qatar.






12/07/2026 - 06:57
US says it struck 140 Iranian military targets this week


⁠US ⁠forces ​completed a ​third round of strikes this week ​against ‌Iran, ⁠hitting ‌approximately 140 Iranian military targets, ⁠the Central Command said ​late on Saturday ‌in a post on ‌X.
Targets included ​Iranian missile and drone sites, naval capabilities, ​ammunition ​storage facilities, ​communication networks, and coastal ​surveillance locations, the Central Command added.