08/07/2026 - 08:52
Hungary PM Magyar says he agreed with Ukraine's Zelenskiy to meet bilaterally soon


⁠Hungary's ​Prime ​Minister Peter Magyar said on Wednesday ​that ‌he ⁠had ‌a short discussion with Ukraine's  President Volodymyr Zelensky ​and that they ‌agreed to meet in the ​near future.






08/07/2026 - 08:19
Danish PM says Greenland is 'not for sale' as Trump joins NATO leaders in Turkey


Denmark’s Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen on Wednesday rejected renewed demands by President Donald Trump that the US should take control of Greenland from NATO ally Denmark, saying that “Greenland is of course not for sale”.
“We hope that all, including all allies, will respect the Greenland people right for self-determination,” Frederiksen said ahead of a meeting of the leaders of NATO member countries in Turkey. “And we are sovereign states and we need everybody to respect our territorial integrity and our sovereignty.”






08/07/2026 - 08:09
Poland will strive to ensure NATO pipeline network extended to eastern flank, president says


⁠Poland's president ​will try ​to ensure that NATO's pipeline network is ​extended ‌to ⁠the alliance's eastern flank, ‌he said on Wednesday.
"The ⁠dual-use nature of pipelines ... provides ​the opportunity to build ‌security for NATO's entire eastern ‌flank, so this is ​also an opportunity for me and all ​of central Europe to ​raise this ​issue once again," President Karol Nawrocki said as he arrived at the ⁠NATO summit in Ankara, ⁠Turkey.






08/07/2026 - 08:04
Important to show breaches of Middle East ceasefire are unacceptable, Dutch PM says


⁠It is ​important to ​show Iran that breaches of the "fragile" ceasefire in the ​Middle ‌East ⁠will not be accepted, Dutch ‌Prime Minister Rob Jetten ⁠said on Wednesday, when asked about the ​new US ‌strikes on Iran.
"It is important to show ‌you don't accept ​breaches of the ceasefire," Jetten told reporters before a ​summit of NATO leaders ​in Ankara.
"At ​the same time, you must ​apply maximum diplomatic pressure to make sure talks continue and ⁠a solution is reached."






08/07/2026 - 08:03
Ukrainian drones kill one person, damage two empty oil tankers, Russia says


Ukraine's overnight ⁠drone attacks on ​Russia killed one person and damaged numerous industrial sites and ​two empty oil tankers, local authorities said on Wednesday.
The governor of Russia's Saratov region, Roman Busargin, said on Telegram channel ​that ‌one person was killed, civilian industrial sites ⁠were damaged and several people were injured in a Ukrainian drone attack.
Yury Slyusar, ‌the governor of the southern Rostov region, said on ⁠Telegram that two tankers were damaged in the Taganrog Bay of the Sea of Azov. He ​said the vessels, which were en ‌route to Rostov-on-Don, were empty.
Ukrainian drones attacked a dozen tankers from ‌Russia's "shadow fleet" that were delivering fuel to Crimea over the past several days, ​according to the Ukrainian military.






08/07/2026 - 07:58
Russia launches third air attack on Kyiv in a week


Russia fired ballistic missiles at Kyiv again overnight, officials said on Wednesday, a third ​attack on the Ukrainian capital in less than a week exploiting Ukraine's critical shortage of US-made air-defence interceptors.
The new attack comes as the NATO summit is underway in Ankara, where US President ​Donald ‌Trump is due to hold talks with Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky.






08/07/2026 - 07:55
Trump, NATO allies to begin key talks at Turkey summit


After a pomp-filled welcome in Ankara where his NATO allies were at pains to keep him onside, US President Donald Trump was to get down to the hard business of the summit on Wednesday.
As he landed in the Turkish capital, Trump was effusive in his praise for President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, highlighting their "chemistry" in remarks that contrasted sharply with his lingering bitterness with European allies over the war on Iran. 
"I was very disappointed with NATO," Trump repeated, setting the tone for the summit's main gathering where the alliance's 31 other leaders will come face-to-face with the mercurial US leader when the main session opens at 08:15 GMT.