Home
                    


 







                        Middle East
                    








Live


Middle East live: US says Iran talks to continue, with 'both sides' pausing strikes






Issued on: 
29/06/2026 - 03:47
Modified: 
29/06/2026 - 07:12
 

















                People walk near an anti-U.S. mural in Tehran, Iran, on June 28, 2026.        © Majid Asgaripour, Reuters    
 









                                The United States and Iran will continue their talks aimed at ending the Middle East war, a US official said on Sunday, adding that both sides will stand down after recent clashes. This comes hours after Lebanese Parliament Speaker Nabih Berri rejected a US–Israel–Lebanon framework deal, calling it “an agreement of 'dictates'” that fails to protect Lebanon’s rights. Follow our liveblog for the latest updates.            












29/06/2026 - 07:12
Iran cyberattacks on Israel surged in 2026, Israeli cyber chief says


The number ⁠of Iranian cyberattacks against ​Israel has shot up since the launch of ​the US-Israeli offensive against Iran this year, a senior Israeli security official was quoted as saying.
Yossi Karadi, ​Director ‌General of Israel’s National Cyber Directorate, ⁠told German newspaper Die Welt that in June 2025 during Israeli ‌military operations against Iran, Israel’s authorities registered around 1,600 ⁠hostile cyber incidents. During the same month in 2026, the number had jumped to ​some 4,800 incidents, he told the paper.
Karadi said the attacks were directed against systems used by Israel’s critical infrastructure, central organisations, small ​to medium-sized companies and the public, citing ​law practices and accounting firms as ​among the smaller ones hit.
“So far — and hopefully it stays that ​way — we’ve managed to fend off attacks on critical infrastructure,” he said.






29/06/2026 - 04:22
US and Iran to continue talks as both sides stand down after clashes


The United States and Iran will continue their talks aimed at ending the Middle East war, a US official told AFP late Sunday, adding both sides will stand down after recent clashes.
“Technical talks are slated to continue on all areas of the MOU (memorandum of understanding). Both sides will stand down for now and vessels can move freely” in and around the Strait of Hormuz, the official said in an email.
The official did not confirm a US media report that talks would resume on Tuesday in Qatar.






29/06/2026 - 03:50
US and Iran to stand down on strikes with technical talks set to continue


The US and Iran will stand down on strikes and vessels will be allowed to move freely, as technical talks are slated to continue on all areas of the memorandum of understanding, a US official said on Sunday.
“Technical talks are slated to continue on all areas of the MOU. Both sides will stand down for now and vessels can move freely,” the official said.






29/06/2026 - 03:50
Hezbollah reserves right to self-defence


Hezbollah on Monday said it reserved the right to self-defence after several Israeli attacks on southern Lebanon despite a truce between the two sides and a US–Israel–Lebanon framework to end hostilities.
In a statement, the group said that it “reiterates that what the enemy has done is a blatant violation of the ceasefire to which it has adhered until now, and that it is monitoring and tracking these violations, and reserves its right to defend its homeland and its people”.






29/06/2026 - 03:47
Lebanese parliament rejects US–Israel framework


Lebanese Parliament Speaker and Hezbollah ally Nabih Berri said early Monday that the trilateral framework agreement between Lebanon, Israel and the United States would not pass as it did not guarantee Lebanon’s rights.
“This agreement will not pass, and it will not be implemented in its current form,” Berri said in a statement shared by his party, the Amal movement, adding that it was “an agreement of ‘dictates’, not an agreement that preserves Lebanon’s rights”.
The deal paves the way for Lebanese–Israeli peace and conditions Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon on Hezbollah’s disarmament.






29/06/2026 - 03:40
 
Welcome to the France 24 liveblog covering events in the Middle East. You can catch up on yesterday's developments 
here
.








• The Israeli military said it 
destroyed a 200-meter-long tunnel
 used by the Lebanese militant group 
Hezbollah
 in ‌a ⁠village in southern 
Lebanon
.
 
• The ​
United States
 ​and 
Iran
 agreed to stop strikes against ​each ‌other, ⁠and will meet on ‌Tuesday in ​Doha, 
Qatar
's capital, to work out ​their 
dispute ​over the ​Strait of Hormuz
.
 
• Iran launched 
drone
 and missile attacks targeting 
Bahrain
 and 
Kuwait
, threatening a "complete halt" in negotiations if Washington continued its attacks against the Islamic Republic.
 
(FRANCE 24 with Reuters, AP and AFP)


































As it happened





                                    Middle East
                            




















Keywords for this article