Other areas in western and central Ukraine were also struck. At least 15 civilians were reported killed and 127 – including 6 children – were injured, according to Ukrainian authorities.
The strikes also reportedly disrupted essential services, including water and energy.
Nearly 24 hours of continuous strikes


Overnight, the Russian military launched nearly 800 drones and 56 missiles against Ukraine. The strikes included ballistic missiles, air-launched ballistic missiles and cruise missiles, making this one of the most intense and prolonged attacks of the war to date, with nearly 24 hours of continuous strikes across the country.
The areas affected include residential buildings, a school, a veterinary clinic and other civilian infrastructure. Similar strikes targeted energy infrastructure in Kremenchuk, as well as port facilities and residential areas in Chornomorsk. 
On Thursday morning, despite the risk of renewed attacks, UN aid workers and officials, took part in rescue efforts. 
“
Families should always feel safe,
” 
said
 Ms. Castel-Hollingsworth from the scene. “Mothers should not be waiting to know if their children are alive under the rubble after these missile attacks.” 
The senior humanitarian official reiterated that, under humanitarian law, 
civilians must be protected and must not be targeted
.
Civilian toll rising
Civilian casualties in Ukraine over the first four months of 2026 were higher than in the same period in any of the last three years. 
According to the UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine (
HRMMU
), one of the main reasons is the massive increase in the use of long-range weapons: in April, long-range weapons killed at least 84 civilians and injured 628, accounting for 43 per cent of total civilian casualties.
“
I deplore the resumption of these large-scale attacks which have resulted in civilian casualties across the country,
” 
said
 
UN human rights chief
 Volker Türk on Thursday.
“Attacks by long-range weapons are one of the leading causes of civilian casualties in Ukraine. Their expanded use in populated areas will only increase the already mounting toll on civilians.”
Mr Türk added that the loss of civilian lives on both sides of the frontline from short-range drone attacks is unacceptable and called for an immediate de-escalation to save lives and halt further suffering.