www.cropmonitor.org 1 | No. 43 – May 2026 
The Crop Monitor is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global initiative. 
 
 
 GEOGLAM Global Crop Monitor  
 Synthesized from the Crop Monitor for AMIS, the Crop Monitor for Early Warning, and direct submissions from individual countries. 
Crop conditions across the main growing areas are based on inputs, including remotely sensed data, ground observations, field reports, and input from 
national and regional experts. Regions with conditions other than favourable are labelled on the map with a symbol representing the affected crop(s). 
 
 
 
Global Crop Overview 
 
Global crop conditions at the end of April remain generally positive for wheat, maize, rice, and soybeans. For wheat, conditions are 
overall favourable, albeit with some areas of dryness in Europe, the Middle East, and the US. For maize, global conditions are generally 
favourable; however, areas of dryness persist in parts of Sub-Saharan Africa and are developing in the southeast US. For rice, overall 
conditions are favourable; however, there are some flooding concerns in northeastern Bangladesh . For soybeans, conditions are 
favourable in the Southern Hemisphere, with harvesting continuing  as sowing begins in the Northern Hemisphere. The remaining 
crops are detailed in the CM4EW publication. 
 
Global Climate Influences Overview 
 
Neutral ENSO conditions are present. El Niño conditions are confidently forecast from mid-2026 to early 2027. El Niño conditions may 
develop soon— during May to July 2026 (61 percent chance) — and could become a moderate or strong event. According to the Apri l 
2026 NOAA CPC ENSO outlook, there is an 87 to 92 percent chance of El Niño conditions from July 2026 to January 2027. The likelihood 
of extreme conditions during the coming year will increase as El Niño warms global temperatures. 
 
For additional details, see the Global Climate Influences and Regional Climate Outlooks section.
www.cropmonitor.org 2 | No. 43 – May 2026 
* Assessment based on information as of 28 April 2026 
 
 
WHEAT 
Wheat crop conditions in the main growing areas are based on a combination of national and regional crop analyst inputs and Earth  Observation data. 
Conditions are based upon information as of 28 April 2026. 
In North America, drought in the US continues to expand across winter wheat areas. Spring wheat sowing picks up pace. In Canada, 
conditions have improved for winter wheat owing to recent above- average precipitation in Ontario and Quebec . In Mexico, the 
autumn-winter season crop is under favourable conditions.  In Europe, winter wheat is under generally favourable conditions; 
however, additional rainfall is needed in central and eastern Europe to avoid rapid deterioration in crop conditions before entering the 
reproductive stages. In the UK, conditions are favourable. In Türkiye, conditions remain favourable for winter wheat. In Ukraine, winter 
wheat is under favourable conditions despite frequent and prolonged frosts in April. In the Russian Federation, winter wheat is under 
favourable conditions. Spring wheat sowing is ongoing, albeit slowed by recent cold and wet weather . In Central Asia, winter wheat 
continues to develop in Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and Afghanistan under favourable conditions. In Kazakhstan, 
winter wheat conditions are favourable. Sowing of spring wheat is now underway across southern Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, 
and Afghanistan under favourable conditions. In South Asia, the harvest is wrapping up in India under favourable conditions despite 
some localized damage from late -season rainfall and hail. In Pakistan, harvesting is progressing under favourable conditions . In 
Bangladesh, harvesting is wrapping up. In Nepal, harvesting is ongoing. In East Asia, winter wheat in China develops under favourable 
conditions as spring wheat sowing continues. In Mongolia, spring wheat sowing  is underway. In MENA, winter wheat continues to 
develop across Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, 
Egypt, Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, and Iran, and harvesting is 
just beginning in some areas . However, early-season 
dry conditions continue to negatively affect crop 
performance in northwestern Libya and parts of 
central Iran.  Flooding at the end of March also 
impacted parts of Syria, Iraq, and Iran, though the 
overall impact on crops is expected to be minimal. In  
Sub-Saharan Africa, winter wheat harvesting  in 
Sudan is  wrapping up with below -average yields 
expected due to ongoing conflict . In Tanzania, 
conditions are favourable for winter wheat  with 
harvest beginning in May .  In Lesotho, South Africa, 
and Zimbabwe, sowing of winter wheat is beginning  
under favourable conditions . In Oceania, sowing is 
just beginning in Australia. In South America,  sowing 
is beginning in Uruguay.
For detailed description of the pie chart, please see box on page 5.
www.cropmonitor.org 3 | No. 43 – May 2026 
* Assessment based on information as of 28 April 2026 
 
 
MAIZE 
Maize crop conditions in the main growing areas are based on a combination of national and regional crop analyst inputs and Earth Observation data. 
Conditions are based upon information as of 28 April 2026. 
 
In South America, the harvest in Brazil of the spring-planted crop (smaller season) is progressing under mostly exceptional conditions. 
The summer-planted crop (larger season) is in mostly favourable conditions; however, a lack of rainfall and high temperatures is 
negatively impacting crops in the Southeast region. In Argentina, the harvest of early -planted crops (larger season) slows as priority 
shifts to the soybean harvest. The late- planted crop (smaller season) continues through the grain -filling stage under favorable 
conditions. In Uruguay, the harvest for the late -planted crop is wrapping up.  In Central America & the Caribbean , conditions are 
favourable in Mexico for the autumn-winter season (smaller season). In Cuba, harvesting of second -season maize is wrapping up 
with below-average yields. In Haiti, the Printemps season is under favourable conditions. In Guatemala, sowing is beginning for the 
Primera season of maize. In North America, sowing is progressing in the US, with an expected reduction in total sown area compared 
to last year . In Europe, sowing in the EU is ongoing under favorable conditions. In Ukraine, sowing is beginning. In the Russian 
Federation, sowing is beginning. In South Asia, the harvest of the Rabi crop (smaller season) in India is wrapping up under favorable 
conditions. In Sri Lanka, sowing of  the Yala season maize is just beginning . In Bangladesh, the harvest for the Rabi /winter crop is 
wrapping up. In Nepal, sowing of the main season maize progr esses. In East Asia , sowing of spring -maize in China  is continuing 
throughout the country. In Southeast Asia, the harvest 
in Indonesia of the wet -season crop continues as 
sowing of the dry -season c rop begins. In Malaysia, 
conditions are favourable. Dry -season maize 
harvesting is wrapping up in  Cambodia as it 
progresses in  Laos, Myanmar, the Philippines, and 
Thailand. In East Africa, Belg crops are favourable in 
Ethiopia. In South Sudan , sowing is ongoing. In 
Uganda, Kenya (long rains), Somalia (Gu season), 
Rwanda, Burundi, and the United Republic of 
Tanzania, sowing and development of the main 
season maize is underway. Recent drier than average 
conditions are causing concern in Rwanda, Burundi, 
and the central and western bimodal areas of Uganda. 
In West Africa, sowing of main season maize is 
underway along the Gulf of Guinea, including in 
Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Benin, Nigeria, 
Cameroon, and the Central African Repu blic. In 
Southern Africa, harvesting is ongoing in  Angola, 
Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Malawi, 
Mozambique, Madagascar, Lesotho, and eSwatini. 
Yield concerns remain in Angola, Madagascar, 
Mozambique, and Zimbabwe. In South Africa, harvest 
is progressing under mostly favourable to exceptional 
conditions.
For detailed description of the pie chart, please see box on page 5.
www.cropmonitor.org 4 | No. 43 – May 2026 
* Assessment based on information as of 28 April 2026 
 
 
RICE 
Rice crop conditions in the main growing areas are based on a combination of national and regional crop analyst inputs and Earth Observation data. 
Conditions are based upon information as of 28 April 2026. 
 
In East Asia, the early double-crop rice (smallest season) in China is developing as the sowing of single- season rice (largest season) 
begins. In Central & South Asia, the harvest in India is progressing for the Rabi crop as the Summer crop continues to develop. In 
Bangladesh, harvesting of the Boro  crop (largest season) advances in a race against rising waters from heavy rains in the low -lying 
haor regions of the northeast. Sowing continues for the Aus crop (smallest season). In Sri Lanka, sowing of Yala season rice is beginning 
under favourable conditions. In Nepal, sowing of second -season rice is progressing under favourable conditions. In Southeast Asia, 
harvesting in Indonesia of wet-season rice continues as sowing begins for dry -season rice. In Malaysia, the harvest is wr apping up 
for wet-season rice as sowing progresses for dry-season rice. In Brunei, harvesting of wet-season rice is wrapping up as the sowing 
of dry-season rice begins. In Viet Nam, winter-spring (dry-season) rice is under favourable conditions across the country as harvesting 
continues in the south and the sowing of summer-autumn (wet-season) rice begins. In Thailand, harvesting continues for dry-season 
rice with an expect ed increase in yields compared to last season, albeit with a reduction in total sown area. In the Philippines, dry -
season rice harvesting is ongoing with a slight reduction in yields compared to last year.  In Myanmar, sowing of dry -season rice is 
finishing under favourable conditions , as the  
harvesting of earlier -planted crops continues. In 
Cambodia, harvesting of  dry-season rice is 
progressing. In Laos, harvesting of dry-season rice is 
beginning. In the  Americas, the harvest in Brazil is 
continuing. In Argentina, harvesting is wrapping up. In 
Mexico, the autumn-winter crop is under favourable 
conditions. In Cuba, harvesting of the second-season 
rice crop is beginning under mixed condit ions. In 
Haiti, main season rice is under favourable 
conditions. In Sub-Saharan Africa, sowing of main 
season rice is underway along the Gulf of Guinea, 
including in Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Benin, 
and Nigeria. In Mali,. Conditions remain poor due to 
the ongoing conflict. In Kenya, second-season rice is 
under favourable conditions . In Tanzania, conditions 
have improved due to recent rains. In Mozambique, 
conditions are mixed due to earlier flooding and a 
long dry spell . In Madagascar, ric conditions have 
improved across the country. 
For detailed description of the pie chart, please see box on page 5.
www.cropmonitor.org 5 | No. 43 – May 2026 
* Assessment based on information as of 28 April 2026 
 
 
For detailed description of the pie chart please see box on page 5. 
SOYBEAN 
Soybean crop conditions in the main growing areas are based on a combination of national and regional crop analyst inputs and Earth Observation data. 
Conditions are based upon information as of 28 April 2026. 
 
In South America, the harvest in Brazil is wrapping up under exceptional conditions in the Central- West, Southeast, and Northern 
regions, thanks to mostly good weather throughout the season. In Argentina, harvesting is progressing for the early -planting crop 
(larger season) despite delays from recent heavy rainfall. Yields are good, supported by timely rainfall since mid -February. The late-
planted crop (smaller season) is reaching maturity under favorable conditions, with harvest just beginning in the north.  In Uruguay, 
harvesting has begun with mixed yields. In Africa, harvest is ongoing in South Africa with above-average yields expected across most 
of the country, with an increase in total sown area compared to last year and the five- year average. In North America, sowing in the 
US is ramping up under generally favorable conditions, with an expected increase in total sown area compared to last year.  In Europe, 
sowing is just beginning in the EU with dry topsoil conditions in central Europe. In Ukraine, sowing is just beginning under favorable 
conditions, with an increase in total sown area expected compared to last year.
Pie Chart Description: Each slice represents a country's 
share of total global production (5 -year average). Main 
producing countries (representing 90 -95 percent of 
production) are shown individually, with the remaining 5 -
10 percent grouped into the “Smaller Producing Countries” 
category. The proportion within each national slice is 
coloured according to the crop conditions within a specific 
growing area; grey indicates that the respective area is out 
of season. Sections within each slide are weighted by the 
sub-national production statistics (5 -year average) of the 
respective country. The section within each national slice 
also accounts for multiple cropping seasons (e.g., spring 
and winter wheat). When conditions are other than 
‘favourable’, icons are added that provide information on 
the key climatic drivers affecting conditions.
www.cropmonitor.org 6 | No. 43 – May 2026 
* Assessment based on information as of 28 April 2026 
 
 
Global Climate Influences 
 
Neutral ENSO conditions are present. El Niño conditions are confidently forecast from mid-2026 to early 2027. El Niño conditions 
may develop soon— during May to July 2026 (61 percent chance) — and could become a moderate or strong event. According to 
the April 2026 NOAA CPC ENSO outlook, there is an 87 to 92 percent chance of El Niño conditions from July 2026 to January 2027. 
The likelihood of extreme conditions during the coming year will increase as El Niño warms global temperatures. 
 
El Niño events tend to enhance rainfall in Central Asia, southern North America, south -eastern South America, southern Europe, 
eastern and southern East Africa, and southern and eastern China. Drier-than-average conditions tend to occur in Central America, 
the Caribbean, northern South America, parts of western and northern East Africa, the Sahel region, Southern Africa, India, 
Northern China, the Maritime Continent, and Australia. 
 
Location and timing of likely above - and below-average precipitation related to El Niño events. Based upon observed precipitation during 22 El Niño events since 
1950, wet and dry correspond to a statistically significant increase in the frequency of precipitation in the upper and lower thirds of historical values, respectively. 
Statistical significance at the 95% level is based on the resampling of precipitation during neutral El Niño-Southern Oscillation conditions. Source: FEWS NET & NOAA 
& CHC 
 
During May 2026, above-average temperatures are forecast in West Africa, East Africa, central Southern Africa and Madagascar, 
central and northern Asia, Southeast Asia, eastern Australia, western Canada, the western United States, northern Mexico, Central 
America, the Caribbean, and northern and central South America. 
 
Source: UCSB Climate Hazards Center  
Average temperature anomaly forecast for the next 30 days starting on 26 March 2026, from four Subseasonal Consortium 
(SubC) models. SubC data accessed from the IRI Data Library. Map source: UCSB Climate Hazards Center
www.cropmonitor.org 7 | No. 43 – May 2026 
* Assessment based on information as of 28 April 2026 
 
 
Regional Climate Outlooks 
Both the short-term (2 weeks) and the long-term (3 months) forecasts reflect the warming global temperatures, while the long-term 
forecast reflects the potential development of an El Niño event. 
In North America, the two-week forecast (Figures 1 & 2) indicates a likelihood of below-average precipitation over central and western 
Canada. During the same time, temperatures are likely to be above-average over the Canadian Pacific coast and the US Northwest 
and Southwest, while likely below-average over central and eastern Canada and the US Midwest and Northeast. The long-term April-
May-June 2026 forecast (Figures 3 & 4) indicates a leaning towards below-average precipitation on the Canadian Pacific coast. During 
the same time, temperatures are likely to be above -average over the entire region, with the highest likelihood over the western and 
southeast US. For additional details, see the CM4AMIS Regional Outlook for the USA. 
In Central America & the Caribbean, the two-week forecast (Figures 1 & 2) indicates a likelihood of above-average precipitation over 
central Mexico, while below-average precipitation over western Cuba, southern Guatemala, Honduras, eastern El Salvador, western 
Nicaragua, and southern Costa Rica. During the same period, temperatures are likely to be above-average over eastern and western 
Mexico, southern Cuba, Guatemala, El Salvador, southern Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and eastern Panama. The long-term April-
May-June 2026 forecast (Figures 3 & 4) suggests likely above-average precipitation over western Mexico, while likely below-average 
precipitation over southeast Mexico, Cuba, Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Belize, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa 
Rica, and Panama. During this time, temperatures are highly likely to be above-average over most of the region. For additional details, 
see the CM4EW Regional Outlook for Central America and the Caribbean. 
Figure 1: IRI SubX Precipitation Biweekly Probability Forecast for 9 – 22 May, issued on 1 May 2026 . The forecast is based on statistically calibrated tercile 
category forecasts from three SubX models. Source: IRI Subseasonal Forecasts Maproom 
In South America, the two -week forecast (Figures 1 & 2) indicates likely above -average precipitation over northern and northeast 
Brazil, while below-average precipitation over northern Colombia, Venezuela, Guyana, southeastern Bolivia, Paraguay, southern Brazil, 
Uruguay, northern and central Argentina, and southern Chile . During this time, temperatures are likely to be above -average over 
western and central Colombia, northern Venezuela, Ecuador, western and southern Peru, southwestern Bolivia, the majority of Brazil, 
and northern Chile, while below-average over central Peru, western Brazil, northern Bolivia, and central Argentina . The long -term 
April-May-June 2026 forecast (Figures 3 & 4) suggests likely  below-average precipitation over western Colombia , northern 
Venezuela, Guyana, Suriname, and northern Argentina . During that time, temperatures are  likely to be above-average over most of 
the region except for Argentina, southern Chile, northern Uruguay, and southern Brazil.
www.cropmonitor.org 8 | No. 43 – May 2026 
* Assessment based on information as of 28 April 2026 
 
 
 
In Europe, the two-week forecast ( Figures 1 & 2 ) indicates likely above-average precipitation over southern Norway, southwestern 
Sweden, Estonia, eastern Latvia, northeastern Lithuania, and central Russia , while below-average precipitation over Portugal, Spain, 
southern Italy, southern Albania, southern Greece, northern Russian Federation, and western Türkiye. During this time, temperatures 
are likely to be above-average over Greece and western Türkiye, while leaning towards below-average over Ireland, eastern France, 
southern Germany, southern Norway, southern Sweden, Switzerland, Austria, and southwestern Poland . The long-term April-May-
June 2026 forecast (Figures 3 & 4) indicates likely above-average precipitation over eastern Türkiye, while a leaning towards below-
average precipitation over Latvia, Lithuania, and central Belarus. During the same period, temperatures are highly likely to be above-
average over Europe except for Portugal, Spain, Ireland, the northern United Kingdom, and western Türkiye. 
Figure 2: IRI SubX Temperature Biweekly Probability Forecast for 9 – 22 May, issued on 1 May 2026 . The forecast is based on statistically calibrated tercile 
category forecasts from three SubX models. Source: IRI Subseasonal Forecasts Maproom 
In MENA, the two-week forecast (Figures 1 & 2) indicates a likelihood of below-average precipitation over Syria, northern Morocco, 
and northern Algeria . During this time, temperatures are likely to be above -average over Morocco, central and southern Algeria, 
Tunisia, Jordan, and northwestern Saudi Arabia. The long-term April-May-June 2026 forecast (Figures 3 & 4) indicates likely above-
average precipitation over central and eastern Syria, Iraq, eastern Jordan, northeastern Saudi Arabia, and northern Iran. During this 
time, temperatures are highly likely to be above-average over the entire region, except for western Morocco and northwestern Iran.  
In Sub-Saharan Africa, the two-week forecast (Figures 1 & 2) indicates likely above-average precipitation over southern South Sudan, 
northern and western Uganda, eastern and central Democratic Republic of the Congo, northern Angola, and northcentral South Africa, 
while below-average precipitation over southern Senegal, The Gambia, Guinea -Bissau, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, southern Mali, 
western and southern Burkina Faso, northern Nigeria, southeastern Chad, western Ethiopia, northeastern Tanzania, northern 
Madagascar, and western South Africa. During this time, temperatures are likely to be above-average over Mauritania, Mali, Senegal, 
The Gambia, Guinea -Bissau, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Côte d'Ivoire, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Togo, Benin, Nigeria, Cameroon, 
southern Chad, the northern Central African Republic, Equatoria Guinea, Gabon, the southern Republic of the Congo, northern South 
Sudan, western Ethiopia, southern Somalia, Kenya, Rwanda, northeastern Tanzania, northern Malawi, central Mozambique, southern 
Zambia, southeastern Angola, Namibia, southwestern South Africa, and Madagascar, while likely to be below -average over eastern 
Niger, northern and central Chad, and northwestern South Sudan. For the long-term April-May-June 2026 forecast (Figures 3 & 4), 
precipitation is likely to be above-average over southern Mauritania, southwestern Mali, Senegal, The Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, 
Sierra Leone, southern Sudan, South Sudan, western Ethiopia, northern Uganda, and the northeastern Democratic Republic of the 
Congo. During this time, temperatures are highly likely to be above- average over the entire region, except for western Namibia, 
Botswana, Zimbabwe, southern Mozambique, most of South Africa, Lesotho, and Eswatini. For  additional details, see the CM4EW  
regional outlooks for East Africa.
www.cropmonitor.org 9 | No. 43 – May 2026 
* Assessment based on information as of 28 April 2026 
 
 
In Central Asia, the two -week forecast (Figures 1 & 2) indicates likely above -average precipitation over western Kazakhstan, 
northwestern Turkmenistan, and western Uzbekista n, while below -average precipitation is likely over northern and eastern 
Kazakhstan, central Uzbekistan, and southern Mongolia.  During this time, temperatures are leaning towards  above-average over 
southern Kazakhstan. The long -term April-May-June 2026 forecast (Figures 3 & 4)  indicates a leaning towards above-average 
precipitation over Kyrgyzstan. At the same time, temperatures are likely to be above-average over southern and western Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyzstan, eastern Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and southern Afghanistan.  
Figure 3: Based on January conditions, a probability forecast for the most likely May-June-July (MJJ) 2026 rainfall tercile. The white colour indicates that there 
is no dominant category across the model forecasts. Source: WMO Lead Centre for Long-Range Forecast Multi-Model Ensemble 
In South Asia, the two-week forecast (Figures 1 & 2) indicates likely below-average precipitation over central India. During this time, 
temperatures are likely to be above-average over western Pakistan, southwestern India, and western Sri Lanka, while below-average 
over Bangladesh, northeastern India, eastern Nepal, and Bhutan. The long-term April-May-June 2026 forecast (Figures 3 & 4) indicates 
likely below-average precipitation in central and western India, eastern Pakistan, and western Nepal. During this time, temperatures 
are likely to be above-average over southern Pakistan, western and northeastern India, and Sri Lanka. For additional details, see the 
CM4AMIS Regional Outlook for India. 
In East Asia, the two-week forecast (Figures 1 & 2) indicates likely above-average precipitation over southern China , while below -
average precipitation is likely over northern and southwestern China and southern Japan. During this time, temperatures are likely to 
be above-average over eastern and southern China, the Republic of Korea, the southern Democratic Republic of Korea, and Japan, 
while leaning towards below -average temperatures over northcentral Mongolia. The long -term April-May-June 2026 forecast 
(Figures 3 & 4) indicates a leaning towards above-average precipitation over southeastern and western China, while a leaning towards 
below-average precipitation over northwestern Mongolia. During that time, temperatures are likely to be above- average over most 
of the region except for north-central China. 
In Southeast Asia & Oceania, the two -week forecast (Figures 1 & 2) indicates likely below-average precipitation over Indonesia and 
eastern Australia, while below-average precipitation is likely over Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Viet Nam, Cambodia, and the central and 
southern Philippines.  During this time, temperatures are likely to be above-average over most of the region except for central 
Indonesia, central and western  Australia, and northern New Zealand. The long-term April-May-June 2026 forecast (Figures 3 & 4)  
indicates likely below-average precipitation over southern Myanmar, eastern Thailand, the southern Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia, 
Papua New Guinea, eastern and western Australia, and northern New Zealand . During the same time, temperatures are likely to be 
above-average over Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Viet Nam, the Philippines, Malaysia, central and northern Indonesia, 
northern Papua New Guinea, southcentral and southeast Australia, and New Zealand. For additional details, see the CM4AMIS Regional 
Outlook for Australia.
www.cropmonitor.org 10 | No. 43 – May 2026 
* Assessment based on information as of 28 April 2026 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Based on January conditions, a probability forecast for the most likely May-June-July (MJJ) 2026 temperature tercile. The white colour indicates that 
there is no dominant category across the model forecasts. Source: WMO Lead Centre for Long-Range Forecast Multi-Model Ensemble 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Crop Monitor is a part of GEOGLAM, a GEO global initiative.  
Prepared by members of the GEOGLAM Community of Practice . 
Coordinated by the University of Maryland with funding from NASA Harvest . 
Synthesized from the Crop Monitor for AMIS, the Crop Monitor for Early Warning, and direct submissions from individual countries. 
 
2026 Global Crop Monitor release dates: 
5 February , 5 March , 2 April, 7 May, 4 June, 2 July, 6 August, 3 September, 1 October, 5 November, 3 December  
 
https://cropmonitor.org/ 
@GEOCropMonitor
www.cropmonitor.org 11 | No. 43 – May 2026 
* Assessment based on information as of 28 April 2026 
 
 
Appendix 1: Terminology & Definitions 
Crop Conditions: 
Exceptional: Conditions are much better than average* at the time of reporting. This label is only used 
during the grain-filling stage through the harvest stages. 
Favourable: Conditions range from slightly lower to slightly better than average* at reporting time.  
Watch: Conditions are not far from average* but there is a potential risk to final production. The crop 
can still recover to average or near -average conditions if the ground situation improves. This label is 
only used during the planting to the early vegetative and vegetative-reproductive stages. 
Poor: Crop conditions are well below-average*. Crop yields are likely to be more than 5 -25% below-
average. This is only used when conditions are not likely to be able to recover, and an impact on 
production is likely. 
Failure: Crop conditions are extremely poor. Crop yields are likely to be 25% or more below -average. 
Out of Season: Crops are not currently planted or in development during this time. 
No Data: No reliable source of data is available currently. 
*” Average” refers to the average conditions over the past 5 years. 
 
 
Drivers:  
These represent the key climatic, environmental, and anthropogenic drivers that are having an impact on crop 
condition status. They result in production impacts and can act as either positive or negative drivers of crop  
conditions. 
 
Wet: Wetter than average (including waterlogging and floods). 
Dry: Drier than average. 
Hot: Hotter than average. 
Cool: Cooler than average or risk of frost damage. 
Extreme Events:  A catch-all for all other climate risks ( i.e., hurricane, typhoon, frost, hail, winter kill, wind 
damage, etc.). When this category is used, the analyst will also specify the type of extreme event in the text. 
Delayed-Onset: Late start of the season. 
Pest & Disease: Destructive insects, birds, animals, or plant disease. 
Socio-economic: Social or economic factors that impact crop conditions ( i.e., policy changes, agricultural 
subsidies, government intervention, etc.) 
Conflict: Armed conflict or civil unrest that is preventing the planting, working, or harvesting of the fields by the 
farmers. 
 
 
Crop Calendars: 
In countries with multiple cropping seasons for the same crop, the larger producing season (based on the most recent 5 years  
of statistics) has been assigned to the first season (e.g., Maize 1). The full list of the cropping seasons and the national season 
names associated with each crop season can be found on the crop monitor website under the Classification System section . 
 
Crop Condition Index: 
Current Crop Conditions: The Crop Condition Index is a simple system that summarises the global crop condition for each of 
the crops monitored by the GEOGLAM Crop Monitors. It is based only on crops that are currently in season and are not classified 
as having “No Data. " The indicator is calculated for each crop using the percentage of a ctive crops in each of the five active 
categories (Exceptional, Favourable, Watch, Poor, and Failure). The formula is calculated as follows.  
 
Crop Condition Index = ((5 x Exceptional) + (4 x Favourable) + (3 x Watch) + (2 x Poor) + (1 x Failure))/100  
 
The crop index is considered “Positive”, with a green-coloured crop symbol, when the index value is between 5.0 and 3.75.  
The crop index is considered “Mixed”, with an orange-coloured crop symbol, when the index value is between 3.74 and 3.25. 
The crop index is considered “Negative”, with a dark red-coloured crop symbol, when the index value is between 3.24 and 1.0. 
 
Crop Condition Index Comparisons: Crop index changes are measured between the current month’s value compared to the 
previous month’s value, and last year’s value. If the value changes by 0.10 (2%) or more, a change is indicated for either “better” 
(indicated by an up arrow) or “worse” (indicated by a down arrow) compared to the previous time step. Otherwise, crop 
conditions are considered “Stable” (indicated by a dash).