Reduced food access worsening acute food insecurity in the north and center 
Key Messages 
This report provides an update to the February to September 2026 
Food Security Outlook and March 2026 Key Message Update. The 
analysis is based on information available as of April 28, 2026. 
Mali - Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026 
Emergency (IPC Phase 4) outcomes observed in the Ménaka 
region will continue through September due to the severe 
difficulties populations face in accessing food, linked to the 
major deterioration of livelihoods and the high number of 
displaced persons. Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes will persist 
in Kidal through September 2026 due to degraded livelihoods. 
In other insecure areas, food insecurity outcomes ranging from 
Stressed (IPC Phase 2) to Crisis (IPC Phase 3) will continue 
through September 2026 for poor households whose purchasing 
power has been severely eroded. 
The resurgence of security incidents in the north and 
center between the army and armed groups continues to trigger 
displacement and further degrade household livelihoods. 
Coordinated attacks by Jama’at Nusrat al-Islam wal-Muslimin 
(JNIM) and the Azawad Liberation Front (FLA) on Mopti, Gao, 
Kidal, Kati, and Bamako on April 25, as well as the blockade of 
Bamako announced by JNIM on April 28, are disrupting trade 
flows. FEWS NET is monitoring the ongoing road blockages that 
are hindering trade flows and could affect acute food insecurity 
in Bamako if prolonged, and will update its analysis in May. 
Disruptions to transhumance are causing an early 
deterioration in livestock conditions in the northern part of 
the country, reducing livestock production and pastoral income, 
thereby weakening the purchasing power of pastoral 
households. 
Disruptions in fuel supply, particularly diesel, are expected 
to continue due to developments in the Middle East and 
insecurity along the Dakar and Abidjan corridors, leading to 
higher transportation costs and an increased cost of living. This 
situation limits poor households’ access to food, forcing them to 
rely on borrowing, support from relatives and friends, and 
significant reductions in non-food and even food expenditures. 
FEWS NET is a United States Government-funded activity. The content of this report does not
necessarily reflect the view of the United States Government.
FEWS NET Mali
mali@fews.net
fews.net/west-africa/mali
Current anomalies in food security conditions as of April 2026 
Security incidents continue to be reported across the country, 
particularly in the northern, western, and central regions, involving 
clashes between the army and the armed groups JNIM, FLA, and the 
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara (EIGS). Coordinated attacks by 
JNIM and FLA in the regions of Kidal, Gao, Mopti, and the cities of 
Kati and Bamako against military positions on April 25, 2026 
significantly disrupted population movements, especially in Kidal. 
On April 28, JNIM announced a blockade of Bamako, reducing 
commercial flows into the capital. Armed groups are intensifying 
repression against civilian populations. Restrictions on freedom of 
movement, combined with population displacement, are worsening 
already precarious household conditions. 
Disruptions to transhumance movements caused by insecurity 
are leading to an early deterioration of livestock conditions in 
areas with high concentrations of herds in the north of the country, 
creating feed shortages for livestock. In addition to reducing herd 
sizes, these difficulties are causing animal production (milk, butter, cheese) to fall below typical levels. The decline in 
pastoral income is limiting the purchasing power of pastoral households. 
Insecurity continues to restrict access to certain fishing areas in the Niger Delta and in Tombouctou and Gao, 
reducing catches and, consequently, incomes to below average levels, while also weakening the purchasing power of 
fishing households in these areas. 
Market supply disruptions persist in insecure areas of the center and north due to attempted blockades and 
the payment of illegal taxes to armed groups, particularly in the regions of Ménaka, Kidal, Gao, and Tombouctou. 
Access to staple cereals in these areas remains limited for poor households because prices remain above the five-
year average by 16 percent in Gao (millet), 25 percent in Ménaka (millet), and 37 percent in Kidal (wheat semolina) in 
March (Figure 1). 
Persistent difficulties related to fuel availability have worsened due to disruptions in maritime trade linked to 
the conflict in the Middle East. At the end of March, the government increased gasoline prices by 13 percent and 
diesel prices by 30 percent amid an ongoing supply crisis within the country, and prices on parallel markets range 
from double to even higher than official rates. In Kidal, gasoline sells for 2,500 FCFA per liter and diesel for 1,500 
FCFA per liter, compared with official prices of 875 and 940 FCFA, respectively. The country continues to suffer the 
impacts of trade disruptions related to the situation in the Middle East, given its heavy dependence on international 
fuel imports. Transport costs increased by more than 30 percent compared with March, driving up the prices of 
essential goods (food and non-food), and further reducing the purchasing power of poor households in a context of 
declining income-earning opportunities. Following the increase in transport costs and the fees paid to armed groups 
in Kidal at the end of March, the price of imported rice increased from 40,000 to 65,000 FCFA per 50 kilogram bag. 
The combination of the electricity crisis and increasing fuel prices continues to negatively affect the 
country’s economy. Although fuel availability has improved compared with the previous three months due to the 
absence of attacks on fuel convoys since March, supplies remain limited outside Bamako. Rising production costs for 
industrial units and increasingly mechanized agricultural operations are slowing economic activities, further 
limiting employment and income-earning opportunities for poor households, particularly in urban centers and areas 
most affected by the fuel crisis. 
Major disruptions to maritime trade in the Middle East, a major supplier of liquefied natural gas, have 
increased fertilizer costs on the global market. According to the agricultural service, fertilizer prices rose between 
February and March 2026 by 19 percent for urea, 18 percent for NPK, and 8 percent for DAP, reducing poor farmers’ 
access to these inputs. At the end of March 2026, the country’s available mineral fertilizer stock stood at 146,366 
Figure 1 
Price of staple cereals (millet, maize, 
sorghum, semolina), March 2026 
Source: Food and Nutrition Security Monitoring and 
Early Warning Agency 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 2
metric tons, representing only 22 percent of the estimated needs of 676,646 metric tons. Reduced access to these 
essential inputs for rice, maize, and cotton cultivation during the typical supply period for the new agricultural season 
beginning in May is expected to negatively affect anticipated production. A government campaign, supported by 
technical partners, is underway to promote the use of locally produced organic fertilizers to mitigate impacts on 
agricultural production. 
Humanitarian food assistance 
Food assistance funding, amounting to 4.5 million USD since the beginning of 2026, has covered 3 percent of needs 
(OCHA); comparable levels had been observed in April 2025, but at that time covered only 1.8 percent (OCHA). 
During the first quarter of 2026, food assistance reached only about 9.7 percent (approximately 117,000 people) of 
the target population (1.2 million people), according to the Food Security Cluster. This level is significantly lower 
than in a typical year before the contraction of humanitarian funding in 2025; around 491,000 beneficiaries had been 
recorded during the same period in 2024. Difficulties in mobilizing humanitarian funding have reduced the level of 
coverage of energy needs, with only 241 000 people planned to receive food rations covering between 50 and 100 
percent of needs during the pastoral lean season from March to June 2026 
Updates to key assumptions about atypical food security conditions through September 2026 
Most of the assumptions that underpinned FEWS NET’s analysis of the most likely scenario for the Mali Food 
Security Outlook from February to September 2026 remain valid; however, the following updates have been made 
to incorporate new evidence: 
Security incidents are expected to persist throughout the country, while evolving conflict dynamics will 
increase pressure on the capacities and efforts of Malian authorities to ensure security along major 
transport corridors. Armed groups are expected to continue strategies aimed at multiplying tension hotspots 
across the country through attacks against armed forces positions, civilian populations, and increasingly against 
industrial facilities. 
The increase in official gasoline and diesel prices will raise industrial and agricultural production costs, 
as well as transportation costs. Although an improvement in fuel supply has been observed compared with 
previous months, the impact of the Middle East crisis will worsen the fuel crisis that has been ongoing in Mali 
since September 2025 through higher prices and reduced availability caused by maritime trade disruptions. 
Prices of staple cereals, which were generally stable at the end of March compared with February, are expected 
to rise following the fuel price increase at the beginning of April. Roadblocks established by armed groups on 
routes leading to Bamako will reduce trade flows and prolong disruptions in the capital. Disruptions in the 
country’s fuel supply will persist, with the crisis particularly affecting diesel countrywide. 
Tensions in international markets and rising transportation costs will further reduce imported fertilizer 
volumes and keep fertilizer prices high on the domestic market. Mali’s main fertilizer suppliers include 
Russia and Morocco, through Senegal and Côte d’Ivoire. According to the FAO, the continuation of the crisis is 
expected to contribute to an average increase in global fertilizer prices of 15 to 20 percent during the first half 
of 2026, coinciding with the country’s typical fertilizer procurement period (January to May). This increase is 
expected to result in further fertilizer price hikes in Mali (a net importer of these products) during the critical 
preparation phase for the 2026/27 agricultural season. Higher fertilizer prices will reduce import volumes. 
Reduced access to fertilizers essential for food crops (rice, maize, millet, sorghum) and cash crops 
(cotton) is expected to lead to lower agricultural production and fewer agricultural labor opportunities, 
thereby reducing rural household incomes in the context of atypically high food prices. 
According to the April update of seasonal forecasts, cumulative rainfall is expected to be average to above 
average across the country, while below-average rainfall is likely in southwestern Mali. Reduced rainfall 
could negatively affect production prospects in this part of the country, although good spatiotemporal rainfall 
distribution may mitigate the impact of this deficit. 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 3
Projected acute food insecurity outcomes through September 2026 
In northern Mali, Emergency (IPC Phase 4) outcomes in Ménaka and Crisis (IPC Phase 3) in Kidal will persist 
through September during the pastoral lean season. The resurgence of insecurity continues to disrupt the local 
economy and market supply chains. Household access to food is significantly reduced due to food prices that remain 
far above the five-year average in Kidal (37 percent) and Ménaka (25 percent). The sharp decline in pastoral income, 
particularly in Ménaka where herd sizes have been drastically reduced following excessive livestock sales and theft, is 
further worsening the situation. The ongoing early pastoral lean season will intensify the seasonal deterioration of 
food consumption due to atypically low availability of animal products and reductions in the volume and quality of 
meals. Poor households are unable to access food without resorting to negative coping strategies such as distress 
livestock sales, begging, and dependence on assistance. The already precarious nutritional situation in Kidal and 
concerning conditions in Ménaka (severe acute malnutrition prevalence of 3.4 percent according to the October 2025 
ENSAN survey) will persist due to the atypical worsening of food consumption, challenges in accessing health and 
social services, and limited humanitarian assistance. 
Despite similar security shocks, food security outcomes are more severe in Ménaka, where households have endured 
the prolonged effects of conflict, massive displacement (more than 20 percent of the population), and persistent 
inaccessibility of some areas. In Kidal, households still retain some assets due to the relatively recent intensification 
of attacks observed since last year. However, a small proportion of displaced households and poor households in 
Kidal — mainly displaced persons and poor households in inaccessible areas — will face Emergency (IPC Phase 4) 
or worse outcomes. Security incidents occurring since April 25 are not expected to significantly alter acute food 
insecurity outcomes in these regions at this stage. FEWS NET will continue to monitor the situation, particularly in 
Kidal. 
In insecure areas of Gao, Mopti, and Tombouctou, particularly the districts along the border zone with Burkina 
Faso and Niger known as the “Liptako Gourma,” ongoing Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes will deteriorate to Crisis 
(IPC Phase 3) from May through September 2026. The early depletion of food stocks will result in household 
market dependence for longer than normal, while incomes decline in the face of high food prices. Difficulties in 
accessing markets are exacerbating households’ reliance on strategies such as sharply reducing non-food and food 
expenditures, borrowing, and selling productive assets to meet food needs. Despite some income and food from 
agricultural activities, gathering, and animal products (milk, butter) in June, food consumption will further deteriorate 
through September due to reductions in the number, quantity, and quality of meals. The already concerning 
nutritional situation in these areas is expected to worsen beyond typical levels for the same period. Poor displaced 
households and refugees in these zones, who no longer have regular access to sharply reduced humanitarian 
assistance, will remain in Crisis (IPC Phase 3) to Emergency (IPC Phase 4) through September 2026. Monitoring of 
market functioning, obstacles to humanitarian assistance and economic activities at the start of the agricultural 
season, and population movements linked to recent developments will be strengthened to update the food security 
situation in these areas. 
In the northern areas of the Ségou, Nara, and Nioro regions, ongoing Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes are 
expected to continue through September 2026. A small proportion of the population, particularly displaced 
persons and the poorest households, will face Crisis (IPC Phase 3). Declining incomes linked to insecurity and the 
fuel crisis, worsened by the conflict in the Middle East, will reduce households’ ability to meet food and non-food 
Economic activities, including off-season and rainy season agricultural activities from February to 
September, will be affected by supply difficulties as well as rising fuel and fertilizer prices. Areas where 
agricultural mechanization is highly developed, such as the cotton-producing zones in the south of the country 
and irrigated areas in the Niger River Valley, will be particularly affected. Reduced production is expected, 
especially for crops with high fertilizer requirements such as rice, maize, and cotton. 
According to the World Bank, disruptions in national food production, rising food import costs, and higher 
hydrocarbon costs are expected to fuel inflation in oil-importing countries. As a net importer, Mali will likely 
experience these inflationary pressures. 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 4
needs in a disrupted economic environment. The early lean season, caused by the premature depletion of food 
stocks and high food prices, will reduce food consumption compared with a typical year. Poor households will rely on 
reducing non-food expenditures, selling livestock, and increasing agricultural labor activities, reliance on solidarity 
networks, and borrowing. 
In urban centers, ongoing Stressed (IPC Phase 2) outcomes will continue through September 2026 due to 
declining economic activity linked to the electricity crisis and the fuel crisis worsened by the conflict in the Middle 
East. Rising living costs are eroding household purchasing power and reducing access to food. Poor households are 
resorting to borrowing, support from relatives and friends, and major reductions in non-food and even food 
expenditures. In Bamako, the announced blockade could significantly reduce the flow of goods, including staple 
foods, from the rest of the country into the capital, creating a medium-term risk of price increases if disruptions to 
trade flows persist. This would further weaken the purchasing power of poor households whose incomes are already 
declining due to the economic slowdown. FEWS NET is monitoring developments and will update its analysis in May. 
Although the agricultural zones of the south are expected to remain in Minimal (IPC Phase 1) through 
September 2026, declining purchasing power — resulting from reduced agricultural and non-agricultural incomes 
compared with a typical year — will limit adequate food access for a proportion of households. These households are 
expected to face Stressed (IPC Phase 2) conditions from June through September 2026. 
Annex 1: Updates to events that would likely change projected acute food insecurity outcomes 
While FEWS NET’s projections are considered the “most likely” scenario, there is always a degree of uncertainty in the 
assumptions that underpin the scenario. This means food security conditions and their impacts on acute food security may 
evolve differently than projected. FEWS NET issues monthly updates to its projections, but decision makers need advance 
information about this uncertainty and an explanation of why things may turn out differently than projected. As such, the 
final step in FEWS NET’s scenario development process is to briefly identify key events that would result in a credible 
alternative scenario and significantly change the projected outcomes. FEWS NET only considers scenarios that have a 
reasonable chance of occurrence. 
National 
A sharper increase in global oil and fertilizer prices linked to the conflict in the Middle East 
Likely impact on acute food insecurity outcomes: In this scenario, extremely high global fertilizer and fuel prices 
are expected to lead to a sharper increase in the prices of these products in Mali, while also limiting their availability. 
Although a further official increase in fuel prices is unlikely under this alternative scenario, it is expected that reduced 
fuel supply linked to high global prices will result in a sharp rise in informal fuel prices, as well as a general 
deterioration in fuel availability countrywide. The simultaneous increase in production costs for industrial units and 
agricultural operations will slow economic activities, further limiting employment and income-earning opportunities 
for poor households, particularly in urban centers, who will resort to atypical coping strategies to meet their food and 
non-food needs. The limited availability and significant price increases will further restrict producers’ access to 
fertilizers essential for food crops, thereby reducing off-season rice production more than normal, as well as the 
cultivated areas for the new agricultural campaign. Reduced off-season production and increased transport costs will 
drive up staple food prices, limiting poor households’ access to food. Their purchasing power will decline from June to 
September 2026, during the agropastoral lean season, which will begin early (as soon as May) in insecure areas. As a 
result, an increase in the number of people facing Crisis (IPC Phase 3) or worse conditions — and even a deterioration 
from Stressed (IPC Phase 2) to Crisis (IPC Phase 3) — would likely occur in insecure areas that are highly dependent 
on markets for food consumption (Gao, Nara, Mopti, and Bandiagara). 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 5
Kidal Region 
A military operation to retake Kidal occurs in May 
Likely impact on acute food insecurity outcomes: The army’s decision to return to Kidal would trigger violent 
clashes with armed groups. Major disruptions to economic activities and market supply chains, as well as increasing 
food prices, would reduce households’ ability to meet their food and non-food needs more than previously 
anticipated. Difficulties in accessing food and humanitarian assistance would increase the number of people in need. 
Under this scenario, outcomes in Kidal would deteriorate from Crisis (IPC Phase 3) to Emergency (IPC Phase 4) 
starting in May, in a region where economic opportunities are already extremely limited and populations are highly 
dependent on markets. 
Annex 2: Updates to key sources of evidence used in this analysis 
Many of the key sources of evidence utilized for FEWS NET’s February to September 2026 Food Security Outlook 
remain the same; however, new and additional sources of evidence are listed below. 
Insecurity/conflict Africom Qualitative Evolution of conflicts and intensity of security 
incidents  
The energy sector and its 
associated products 
INSTAT/Food 
Security Cluster, 
Mali Actu 
Quantitative Changes in fuel and transportation prices in 
Mali 
Market supply in insecure 
areas 
Food Security 
Cluster 
Qualitative Information on the impact of security 
incidents/blockades on trade flows and 
market supply 
Agricultural inputs FAO Quantitative Increase in fertilizer prices on the global 
market 
Macroeconomy World Bank Qualitative Rising inflation in oil-importing countries 
Disruptions in oil flows 
linked to the Middle East 
crisis 
ECOFIN Qualitative Impacts of the historic disruption of oil flows 
through the Strait of Hormuz 
 
Evidence  Source 
Data 
format Food security element of analysis 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 6
Annex 3: Seasonal calendar 
Recommended citation: FEWS NET. Mali Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026: Reduced food access 
worsening acute food insecurity in the north and center, 2026. 
Food Security Outlook Update 
This Food Security Outlook Update provides an analysis of current acute food insecurity conditions and any changes to FEWS NET's latest projection of acute food insecurity outcomes 
in the specified geography over the next six months. Learn more here. 
Source: FEWS NET 
* FEWS NET classification is IPC-compatible with limited exceptions. IPC-compatible analysis follows key IPC protocols but does not necessarily reflect the consensus of national food security 
partners. As of IPC 3.0, the IPC no longer assesses the impact of food assistance on classification and thus no longer maps the (!). However, FEWS NET continues to produce food security 
maps inclusive of the (!) as well as maps compatible with IPC 3.0/3.1, which include the mapping of food security assistance bags. In rare cases, FEWS NET classification is IPC-aligned but 
not IPC-compatible. IPC-aligned analysis is evidence-based but some types of evidence required for IPC-compatibility were not available. 
Food Security Outlook Update April - September 2026
Famine Early Warning Systems Network 7