HPG REPORT 
The state of international 
humanitarian funding to  
local and national actors 
Mike Pearson and Niklas Rieger
May 2026
Readers are encouraged to reproduce material for their own publications, as long as they are 
not being sold commercially. ODI Global requests due acknowledgement and a copy of the 
publication. For online use, we ask readers to link to the original resource on the ODI Global 
website. The views presented in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the views of ODI Global or our partners.
This work is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 4.0.
How to cite: Pearson, M. and Rieger, N. (2026) The state of international humanitarian funding 
to local and national actors. HPG report. London: ODI Global (www.odi.org/en/publications/the-
state-of-international-humanitarian-funding-to-local-and-national-actors).
This PDF has been prepared in accordance with good practice on accessibility.
Cover photo: IFRC food distribution in Mabalane district, Mozambique. © Aurélie Marrier 
d’Unienville/IFRC
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank all those who contributed to the paper, whether in defining 
the scope and reviewing the analysis, helping interpret our findings, or in the production and 
dissemination of the report. This process included a wide range of external colleagues, including 
Anita Kattakuzhy, Alexandra Brosnan and Brianna Guidorzi (NEAR), Björn Hofmann, Melissa 
Gonçalves Marques and Samar Al-Attar (Grand Bargain Secretariat), Elise Baudot (ICVA), Howard 
Mollett (CAFOD), Jen Doherty (ALNAP) and Nicholas Noe (Refugees International). In particular, 
colleagues at Oxfam were hugely supportive of this report and the authors thank them for the 
ongoing collaboration throughout all stages of producing the report: Hannah Cooper, Lene 
Grønkjær and Lizz Harrison.
The authors are grateful to colleagues at the United Nations agencies mentioned in this report 
who directed us to the publicly available information, and shared their understanding of and 
additional information on the data, without which the analysis would not be possible.
The authors would also like to express gratitude to the former Humanitarian Team at 
Development Initiatives, which had previously sought to provide the sector with up-to-date 
information on progress on localisation through Global Humanitarian Assistance reports and 
other research, which this paper attempts to build on.
A special thanks to Emma Carter who designed the charts that bring the data to life. A huge thank 
you as well to all Humanitarian Policy Group (HPG) colleagues who supported the production 
of the paper, whether that be in the peer review, project management, editing, typesetting, or 
dissemination of the report: Alexandra Spencer, Almas Korotana, Clement Bruce, Dustin Barter, 
Freddie Carver, Jessica Rennoldson, John Bryant, Kate Oliver, Nicholas Veerapen and Sara Hussain.
About this report
This paper is funded through the Humanitarian System Transformation through Local 
Humanitarian Leadership (HST-LHL) programme with Oxfam and partners, generously funded by 
the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
About the authors
Mike Pearson is a Research Fellow in HPG at ODI Global.
Niklas Rieger is a Research Associate in HPG at ODI Global.
Contents
Acknowledgements / 3
List of boxes, tables and figures / 5
Acronyms and abbreviations / 7
Executive summary / 8
Introduction /  11
1 Volumes of humanitarian funding for LNAs / 13
1.1 Data for tracking funding to LNAs / 13
1.2 Volume of funding to LNAs / 15
1.3 How funding reached LNAs / 19
1.4 Comparison of UN funding to LNAs and Grand Bargain self-reports using public datasets / 24
2 Quality of funding for LNAs / 28
2.1 Duration of grants to LNAs / 28
2.2 Grant sizes to LNAs / 30
2.3 Earmarking of LNA funding / 32
2.4 Provision of overheads to LNAs / 35
3 Pooled funds and funding to LNAs / 37
3.1 Do CBPFs work for LNAs? / 37
3.2 Are all CBPFs financially supporting LNAs to the same extent? / 41
3.3 Which LNAs receive CBPF funding? / 45
3.4 Do CBPFs provide quality funding? / 49
4 Who funds LNAs beyond the UN? / 54
4.1 What does the limited data on NGO-led funds show on their role in advancing localisation? / 54
4.2 MDBs and localisation / 55
4.3 Non-mainstream donors and local and national actor funding  / 57
4.4 Red Cross and Red Crescent National Societies and localisation  / 59
4.5 Gaps in our knowledge – INGOs, private sources, and domestic resource mobilisation / 62
Conclusion / 68
References / 69
Appendix 1   Methodology / 73
List of boxes, tables and figures
Boxes
Box 1 Definition of ‘local and national actors’ / 12
Box 2 Preliminary data on direct funding to LNAs in 2025 / 18
Box 3 Data on direct funding to LNAs from government donors / 24
Box 4 Is funding from a CBPF direct or indirect? / 40
Box 5 Do the CBPFs that the US selected for funding advance localisation? / 48
Tables
Table 1 Contexts selected for the US’ $2 billion contribution to OCHA pooled funds / 49
Table 2 INGO funding in 2024 to LNAs by reporting mechanism / 63
Figures
Figure 1 Data on international humanitarian funding to LNAs by source / 14
Figure 2 Proportion of total humanitarian funding reaching LNAs directly and indirectly,  
2019–2024 /  16
Figure 3 Breakdown of direct and indirect humanitarian funding to LNAs by type, 2019–2024 / 17
Figure 4 Funding to LNAs in the top recipient countries of humanitarian funding to LNAs, 2022–
2024 /  20
Figure 5 The 10 largest providers of direct and indirect funding to LNAs, 2022–2024 / 22
Figure 6 Comparison of Grand Bargain self-reporting and HPG analysis of independently verifiable 
datasets on funding to LNAs, 2024 / 25
Figure 7 Median grant length to refugee-led organisations, according to type of provider 
organisation /  29
Figure 8 Average grant size awarded by UN agencies for national and international NGOs / 31
Figure 9 Proportion of humanitarian funding that is earmarked, by type of recipient / 34
Figure 10 Share of CBPF allocations going to LNAs, 2016–2025 / 39
Figure 11 Volume of CBPF allocations to LNAs, 2016–2025 / 41
Figure 12 Share of CBPF allocations going to LNAs, 2016–2025 / 42
Figure 13 Concentration of localised funding among the top 10 recipients by context, 2025 / 45
Figure 14 Global concentration of localised funding among the top 10 recipients in each context, 
2016–2025 /  46
Figure 15 Average grant duration of CBPF allocations by organisation type, 2016–2025 / 50
Figure 16 Average grant size of CBPF allocations by organisation type, 2016–2025 / 51
Figure 17  Humanitarian financing disbursements from multilateral development banks by degree of 
concessionality, 2020–2024 / 56
Figure 18 Percentage of humanitarian funding in 2024 to LNAs from non-mainstream donors / 57
Figure 19 Percentage of income to RCRC National Societies coming from abroad / 60
Figure 20 Sources of income from abroad to National Societies in emergency contexts / 61
Acronyms and abbreviations
CBPF  country-based pooled fund
CERF  Central Emergency Response Fund
DAC  Development Assistance Committee
ERC  Emergency Relief Coordinator
FTS  Financial Tracking Service
HPG  Humanitarian Policy Group
HRP  Humanitarian Response Plan
IASC  Inter-Agency Standing Committee
IATI  International Aid Transparency Initiative
ICRC  International Committee of the Red Cross
IFRC  International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
INGO  international non-governmental organisation
IOM  International Organization for Migration
LNA  local/national actor
MDB  multilateral development bank
NGO  non-governmental organisation
OCHA  UN Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs
ODA  official development assistance
OECD  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
RCRC  Red Cross and Red Crescent
RHPF  Regional Humanitarian Pooled Fund
RLO  refugee-led organisation
SCHF  Syria Cross-border Humanitarian Fund
TPI  third-party implementer
UAE  United Arab Emirates
UK  United Kingdom
UN  United Nations
UNHCR UN Refugee Agency
US  United States
8
HPG report
Executive summary
It is generally recognised that despite the call for 25% of humanitarian funding to be channelled 
to local and national actors (LNAs, including both non-state actors and state actors) as directly as 
possible, the humanitarian sector has so far failed to deliver. However, it is less well understood that 
we lack even a robust basis on which to hold the sector accountable. Previous estimates of the overall 
proportion of LNA funding have been based primarily on the Financial Tracking Service (FTS), which 
lacks relevant reporting from intermediaries such as United Nations (UN) agencies and international 
non-governmental organisations (INGOs). In the spirit of strengthening collective accountability and 
informing dialogue across the sector, and utilising newly available reporting since 2022, this report puts 
together a more comprehensive picture of the overall funding landscape for the first time by combining 
a range of different data sources.
This report includes funding flow data from five UN agencies (the World Food Programme (WFP), the 
UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR), UNICEF, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the 
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)), as well as data from the International 
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) on funding flows to Red Cross/Red 
Crescent (RCRC) National Societies. Despite this influx of new data, this report finds that only 9.5% 
of international humanitarian funding reached LNAs, directly and indirectly, in 2024 (a decrease from 
10.8% in 2023). In real terms, this equates to around $3.6 billion in 2024. Preliminary data on direct 
funding in 2025 (i.e. without much of the UN partner financial data) suggests that the share going to 
LNAs remained low.
This is undoubtedly a reflection of the failure of the humanitarian sector to transfer resources, 
and ultimately power, to LNAs. Even with our updated dataset, we found no crisis context with a 
Humanitarian Response Plan in which LNAs received 25% or more of international humanitarian 
funding between 2022 and 2024. However, underneath the surface, multiple stories surface. Available 
data suggests that some contexts are ‘localising’ funding far better than others, but this can also be 
driven by who gives to whom. Whilst the UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR) is the largest provider of direct 
and indirect funding across 2022 and 2024, Saudi Arabia comes a close second with more bilateral 
government-to-government funding flows (rather than to non-governmental organisations (NGOs)). 
There are also some discrepancies between our analysis of independently verifiable funding flows and 
the self-reported amounts of funding from UN agencies. Ultimately, the data on funding to LNAs is 
vastly improved by the inclusion of UN partner data, the quality of which has itself improved in recent 
years – this development is welcome. However, at the same time, it is still not enough, as UN partner 
data is published with delays, and it is difficult to access and use. Owing to their size, UN agencies were 
the largest providers of funding to LNAs in our updated dataset. Fundamentally, our ability to hold 
them accountable is made difficult by the varied reporting practices of relevant UN agencies. One key 
recommendation is that:
9
HPG report
Government donors should mandate UN agencies engaged in humanitarian 
action through executive committee decisions or similar collective governance 
mechanisms to publish data on their funding partnerships in an accessible, timely 
and interoperable fashion. Government donors should also improve their own 
internal tracking and public reporting of direct funding to LNAs.
However, as has become a truism over many years, it is not just about the quantity of funding, but also 
the quality. This is critical to prevent this discussion from becoming overly focused on raw numbers, 
which tends towards an unconstructive zero-sum debate about who gets what. On a substantive 
level, evidence from a subset of data on refugee-led organisations (RLOs) shows that grant duration 
deteriorates as it passes through intermediaries, whilst grant sizes from UN agencies are larger for 
INGOs on average than local and national NGOs. Current data suggests that the flexibility of funding is 
greater for international actors than national actors. And whilst there has been progress on policies and 
guidance on the provision of overheads, there is varied practice across donors and intermediaries.
However, the quality funding debate suffers from a paucity of available public data. This is in part a 
function of the lack of agreement about which aspects of quality funding matter most for LNAs, and 
which should be collectively monitored. Therefore, another key recommendation is:
Donors and intermediaries should agree with LNAs on a narrow set of the most 
important quality funding criteria to those actors and report on those publicly.
One funding mechanism with transparent and publicly available information is the Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)’s country-based pooled funds (CBPFs). Given that the 
United States (US) is pledging an initial $2 billion to OCHA’s pooled fund mechanisms in the short term, 
and with the expectation that ‘all U.S. funding of UN humanitarian work [is] to be channelled through 
OCHA pooled fund vehicles’ in the future, according to the State Department, then analysis of CBPFs 
and localisation is highly salient in the current policy context (see Sturridge et al., 2026).
At the aggregate level, CBPFs managed to grant 46% of funding to LNAs in 2025, and this increases 
to 55% when including sub-grantees. This represents $506 million – a substantial increase on the 
$166 million in 2016. However, there is varied practice across pooled funds, with some localising over 
70%, whilst others struggle at below 5%, and for nearly all CBPFs most funding is concentrated in the 
hands of only a few recipients. A key question that will soon become apparent is whether CBPFs can 
expand rapidly (given the $2 billion injection), and localise at the same time – the Emergency Relief 
Coordinator’s aspiration is for 70% of CBPF funding to go to LNAs. With only 12 of the 18 countries 
selected for US funding disbursing to LNAs at a combined amount of $245 million, it is doubtful that 
CBPFs can do both things at the same time. Therefore, another key recommendation is that: 
Each CBPF should publish time-bound roadmaps on how to achieve the ambitious 
localisation aspiration (70%), including what is required from other humanitarian 
actors in each context.
10
HPG report
The localisation debate often defaults to talking about local and national NGOs, with the assumption 
that funding comes from donors in the Global North or intermediaries. But our analysis shows that a 
wider ecosystem of international actors plays a vital role in funding LNAs. The World Bank supports 
national governments in disaster prevention and preparedness work, ‘non-mainstream’ donors often 
support national governments or RCRC National Societies to implement humanitarian programming, 
whilst the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement itself is an often overlooked ecosystem 
that gets funding to LNAs, in the form of National Societies.
There are also significant gaps in our knowledge around funding flows to LNAs, including from INGOs. 
A subset of INGOs examined reported $717 million to the Grand Bargain in funding to LNAs in 2024, 
but only $14 million can be found in FTS and $24 million in the International Aid Transparency Initiative 
(IATI). There are also significant gaps in understanding NGO-led pooled funds, as well as domestic 
government funding and international private funding. Therefore, a key recommendation is that:
INGOs and NGO-led funds should comprehensively publish timely and accessible 
data on the quantity and quality of funding they provide to LNAs.
Whilst the report focuses primarily on the analysis of international humanitarian funding to LNAs, 
further research is needed on the role of other financing sources for LNAs assisting crisis-affected 
populations. Our analysis finds that whether funding for LNAs is reported as development or 
humanitarian assistance can at times be arbitrary, providing evidence that those self-imposed 
distinctions of international actors might be less relevant to some LNAs. This is key in shifting thinking 
in the humanitarian sector towards a more ecosystems approach. We therefore recommend that: 
International humanitarian actors need to more systematically identify which 
resource flows and institutions already support locally led responses in crisis 
contexts, and enable those.
The humanitarian sector is continuing to fall short on funding LNAs. The lack of good-quality data 
has hindered attempts to sufficiently hold the sector to account for the commitments it has made. 
However, as this report shows, humanitarian actors need to make progress on both the implementation 
and monitoring of these commitments.
11
HPG report
Introduction
This report aims to hold a mirror up to the humanitarian system for its commitments to shift 
resources and power to LNAs (including NGOs and governments). For that we use the latest available 
humanitarian funding data with the novel inclusion of financial datasets from UN partnerships and the 
IFRC Network, providing a more comprehensive view than ever before of where the money flows.
The sector-wide objective to channel at least a quarter of all humanitarian funding to LNAs as directly 
as possible was agreed almost 10 years ago as part of the initial set of Grand Bargain commitments 
(Grand Bargain, 2016) and repeatedly reaffirmed since then (e.g. Grand Bargain and DI, 2023). However, 
the ability of humanitarian stakeholders to independently verify progress on this commitment has been 
hampered by a lack of transparency, especially of intermediary organisations, which remain the largest 
providers of funding to LNAs. The aggregate figures published as part of Grand Bargain reporting 
could not be verified independently and were of limited use in determining to whom and to where 
this supposedly localised funding was directed. The dataset assembled for this report and our analysis 
of it seek to advance the transparency and independent scrutiny of the vital commitment to localise 
humanitarian funding. Otherwise, without the ability to independently track progress on the 25% target 
at global and country levels, humanitarian actors set themselves up to fail in ever reaching this goal.
The primary focus of this HPG analysis is determining how much of international humanitarian 
funding reaches LNAs, partly in reference to the Grand Bargain localisation commitments made by 
international actors. We briefly investigate other relevant sources of funding for LNAs, such as from 
domestic governments or multilateral development banks. We recognise that other funding sources, 
such as transfers from diaspora or revenue generated by LNAs themselves (e.g. through microfinance 
activities), are important, especially given shrinking government donor budgets, but we are unable to 
analyse those comprehensively given a lack of comparable data across contexts.
The aspect of the localisation debate we focus on, therefore, is the quantity and quality of funding 
reaching LNAs. There are many other important issues relevant to changing humanitarian responses to 
be more locally led, such as the role and decision-making power of LNAs in response planning or in the 
delivery of assistance, and those are touched upon below regarding the quality of funding. Even so, the 
analysis is anchored in the publicly available and independently verifiable data on funding flows as the 
primary topic of this report.
This report, while largely based on quantitative analysis, is also an analysis of how power is distributed 
in the humanitarian system. The amount of international funding reaching LNAs and their degree of 
freedom over how to use this funding are key determinants of their power to assist crisis-affected 
populations in ways they deem most effective and dignified, and it enables LNAs to meaningfully 
participate in or lead the coordination of humanitarian responses. We also deliberately chose to make 
the dataset underlying this report available in multiple languages to empower LNAs to advocate on 
their own behalf in country-level discussions based on independently verifiable data. And finally, the 
act of deciding who counts as a local actor and who does not for the purposes of the Grand Bargain
12
HPG report
25% target is an exercise of power (see Box 1). We are conscious that we had to make some of those 
decisions ourselves as to which organisations correspond with the agreed Grand Bargain definitions of 
LNAs based on publicly available information (see the Appendix). This was required so that we could 
carry out our analysis; we welcome feedback on the dataset and methodology, which we intend to own 
jointly with the sector, and first and foremost with LNAs.
Box 1 Definition of ‘local and national actors’
In this report and the underlying analysis we adopt the same definition of LNAs as agreed upon by 
Grand Bargain signatories, which includes both of the following (Grand Bargain and DI, 2023):
• Local and national nonstate actors: Organisations engaged in relief that are headquartered 
and operating in their own aid-recipient country and which are not affiliated to an INGO.
• National and sub-national state actors: State authorities of the affected aid-recipient 
country engaged in relief, whether at local or national level.
This means that (based on available data) we did not consider NGOs that register in aid-recipient 
countries and are national entities, but are internationally affiliated, as LNAs (unless they maintain 
independent fundraising and governance systems).
These definitions came from broad consultations across the humanitarian sector in 2017 (IASC, 
2018), including among LNAs, and have been the foundation of international policy reform 
discussions on localisation ever since.
13
HPG report
1 Volumes of humanitarian funding  
for LNAs
1.1 Data for tracking funding to LNAs
The central importance of granular, publicly available data to be able to track who is and is not localising 
their funding, where and how, merits a brief explanation of the data we used in this report. Figure 1 
provides a visual of the datasets we combined into a unified, global dataset of humanitarian funding flows 
to all actors. It highlights the relative size of the datasets in terms of the years and volumes of funding to 
LNAs covered, and shows what datasets were newly added for this report. We are aware of funding data 
to LNAs in Grand Bargain self-reports, but chose not to include them in our dataset as these aggregates 
are not independently verifiable. In section 1.4, we compare the results from our dataset for UN 
agencies with the data from Grand Bargain self-reports. We are taking the approach of using data that is 
disaggregated so that it can be verified and analysed more closely by all interested parties.
Previously, using Financial Tracking Service (FTS), UN Refugee Agency (UNHCR) and country-based 
pooled fund (CBPF) data, around a fifth of the total 2024 humanitarian funding figure was traceable 
through intermediaries. With the newly included data sources highlighted in Figure 1,1 it is now possible 
to trace 61% of total humanitarian funding in 2024, whether the funding was passed on or implemented 
directly by the receiving organisations.2 In other words, the traceability has improved threefold 
following our inclusion of new data sources.
The largest amount of funding data in our dataset is sourced from FTS, administered by the UN Office 
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). FTS has adopted the Grand Bargain definitions 
of local/national and international actors in its dataset, so that all organisations have been sorted into 
these categories. The FTS dataset provides a comprehensive overview of funding directly provided 
by government donors and, where reported on, funding from other sources (e.g. private donors) or 
provided by intermediaries. However, intermediary reporting to FTS is patchy at best.
1 This assumes that the IFRC Network Databank is comprehensive on how much funding the IFRC and the 
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) pass on to Red Cross and Red Crescent (RCRC) National 
Societies.
2 There could be a residual amount of international funding that cannot be traceable, if the original recipient 
organisation of this funding only implements directly and is therefore not publishing any data on its sub-grants 
or funding partnerships. Given the widespread nature of sub-contracting and implementing consortia, we think 
that it would be a rare occurrence for a humanitarian implementer and funding recipient not to partner with 
other implementers anywhere globally.
14
HPG report
Figure 1 Data on international humanitarian funding to LNAs by source
UN OCHA’s Financial
Tracking Service
2019–2024
US$6.4 billion 
UNHCR 
partner data
2022–2024
US$2.1 billion 
CBPF
allocations
2019–2024
US$1.9 billion 
UNICEF 
partner data
2022–2024
US$1.9 billion 
CBPF project
sub-grants
2019–2024
US$0.6 billion 
WFP partner data
2022–2024
US$0.4 billion 
IFRC Network data
2019–2024
US$1.1 billion 
IOM partner data
2022–2024
US$0.2 billion 
Integrated humanitarian funding dataset
Sources: Authors based on the visualised data sources. For more information on each data source, see the Appendix.
Notes: The funding amounts for each data source represent the total volume of direct or indirect humanitarian 
funding to LNAs from that source. Newly added datasets are indicated with red outlines. The data analysis in this 
report only spans 2019 to 2024 – some of the visualised data sources also have data in prior or subsequent years 
publicly available. Funding amounts are in constant 2023 prices to adjust for inflation. See the Appendix for more 
detail on how data was extracted and processed for each source.
OCHA’s CBPFs have attracted much attention as important mechanisms to channel funding to LNAs, 
especially given the recent announcement of the $2 billion contribution from the US to the CBPFs 
(OCHA, 2025a). The funds’ timely and granular allocation data is included in our analysis. The project-
level data on the providers and recipients of sub-grants on projects funded by CBPFs was not publicly 
available at the time of writing − the CBPF office shared the project-level data directly with the authors 
via e-mail.
For many years, the biggest localisation transparency challenge has been that most funding reaches 
LNAs indirectly, according to various surveys and anecdotal evidence, but independently verifiable and 
comprehensive funding data from most intermediaries has either been poor or non-existent. Many 
government donors still prefer supporting LNAs through international intermediaries as opposed
15
HPG report
to providing funding directly to local actors, partly to reduce their administrative burden of having 
to maintain many, often smaller, funding partnerships, or due to an inability at the country level to 
identify and establish effective partnerships. Some local or national NGOs also require cooperation 
with intermediaries to be able to access international humanitarian funding sources, which grants them 
improved risk sharing and technical support. The UN system in particular – except for the CBPFs – 
stood out for consistently receiving over 60% of international humanitarian funding from donors 
(ALNAP, 2025), but providing little to no transparency on how much of that funding was shared with UN 
partners in different contexts.
UN transparency is starting to improve; for the first time, this report combines data from OCHA’s FTS 
and CBPFs with partner funding data from four major humanitarian UN agencies: UNHCR, UNICEF, 
WFP and IOM (see the Appendix for more detail on each data source and how we processed the data). 
However, the UN partner information for those agencies is difficult to access and analyse – stored in 
long PDF document tables scattered across websites – which severely hinders scrutiny. That aside, 
making this partner data publicly available is commendable progress by these UN agencies towards 
more transparency of their funding partnerships, including with local actors.
We also included for the first time data from the IFRC Networks Database on funding to RCRC National 
Societies from different sources, providing a more comprehensive picture than before of the role of 
those local actors in the humanitarian funding environment. 
There is still much room for improvement on making data on funding for LNAs more transparent  
and accessible, thereby hopefully increasing accountability and accelerating overdue localisation 
progress. Our corresponding recommendations are included at the end of each chapter and in the 
executive summary.
1.2 Volume of funding to LNAs
The percentage of global humanitarian funding reaching LNAs was just below 10% in 2024 (Figure 2) 
despite the novel inclusion of partner funding data from four major UN agencies. This presents a small 
decrease compared to 2023 (10.8%) and remains far below the 25% Grand Bargain target. However, 
there are gaps in the data: on funding from INGOs, remittances, diaspora contributions, and funding 
from domestic governments, meaning there might be additional funding to LNAs than is publicly 
reported. When excluding UN partner data for 2022 to 2024, we see the same trend of the share of 
direct and indirect funding to LNAs increasing in 2023 before dropping again in 2024.
16
HPG report
Figure 2 Proportion of total humanitarian funding reaching LNAs directly and indirectly, 2019–2024
6.7%
10.8%
9.5%
3.2%
4.2%
3.0% 3.5%
6.8%
5.2%
1.8%
2.8%
1.6% 2.3%
4.6% 3.8%
0
5
10
15
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Share of total funding (%)
Direct and indirect funding to LNAs (incl. UN partner data)
Direct and indirect funding to LNAs (excl. UN partner data)
Direct funding to LNAs
UN partner data 
not publicly available
UN partner data 
publicly available
Source: OCHA’s FTS, IFRC Network Database, IOM Grant Awards Data, OCHA CBPF Data Hub, UNICEF Transparency 
Portal, UNHCR Collaboration with Funded Partners, WFP Field-Level Expenditures Data. 
Notes: The denominator consists of the total global volume of direct funding as reported to OCHA’s FTS in each year. 
For 2022–2024, the humanitarian funding amounts received by UN agencies with partner data (IOM, UNICEF, WFP 
and UNHCR) in each year are taken from their own reports instead of FTS. This total is used for better comparability 
of funding data within this report and might differ from global humanitarian funding trends calculated based on other 
sources (e.g. OECD DAC data) in the Global humanitarian assistance report  (ALNAP, 2025). UN partner data for those 
four agencies is publicly available only in those three years at the time of writing. For more information on how the 
different datasets on funding to LNAs were merged while avoiding double-counting, see the Appendix. Sub-grants on 
CBPF projects were excluded from the percentage calculation as these include more than one intermediary before 
funding reaches LNAs (see the Appendix).
Direct funding to LNAs remained low in 2024 at 3.8% ($1.4 billion), only slightly higher than in 2020 
(2.8%) and decreasing from the period high of 4.6% in 2023.3 This means that international donor 
governments and private donors (with available data) reduced their direct funding to LNAs from 
2023 to 2024 by significantly more – dropping by over a fifth (22%) – than they reduced their overall 
humanitarian funding (6%). This apparent deprioritisation of direct funding to LNAs by international 
3 T hese percentages differ slightly from those in the most recent Global humanitarian assistance report (ALNAP, 
2025) due to the inclusion of new data sources (IFRC Network Databank), small retrospective changes in FTS 
data and ongoing improvements in organisational classifications.
17
HPG report
donors does not bode well for 2025 and beyond (see Box 2), given the shrinking budgets across many 
donor governments (ALNAP, 2025) – particularly the US, previously a champion for the localisation of 
humanitarian funding before the cuts imposed by the second Trump administration. 
The total volume of direct and indirect funding received by LNAs in 2024 was $3.6 billion, a 17% drop 
from the previous year (Figure 3). Funding volumes to LNAs in 2023 at $4.3 billion were the highest in 
recent years according to available data. Total humanitarian funding dropped by only 6% from 2023 
to 2024, meaning that direct and indirect funding to LNAs decreased disproportionately between 
those years.
 This is undoing some of the progress made in 2023 in growing funding volumes to LNAs, 
as the year-on-year increase then occurred despite global total humanitarian funding reducing by 16% 
compared to 2022 (ALNAP, 2025).
Figure 3 Breakdown of direct and indirect humanitarian funding to LNAs by type, 2019–2024
1.0 
0.5
0.4
1.5 
0.5 
0.7 
1.0 
0.6 
0.3 
3.2 
1.7 
1.2
4.3 
1.7
1.7
3.6 
1.9
1.3
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Humanitarian funding volume (US$ billions)
Local/national governments
Local/national NGOs
RCRC National Societies
Other local/national actors
UN partner data 
not publicly available
UN partner data 
publicly available
Source: OCHA’s FTS, IFRC Network Database, IOM Grant Awards Data, OCHA CBPF Data Hub, UNICEF Transparency 
Portal, UNHCR Collaboration with Funded Partners, WFP Field-Level Expenditures Data. 
Notes: Data on sub-grants to partners for four UN agencies (IOM, UNICEF, WFP and UNHCR) is only available for 
2022–2024. For more information on how the different datasets on funding to LNAs were merged while avoiding 
double-counting, see the Appendix. Data is in constant 2023 prices.
18
HPG report
Box 2 Preliminary data on direct funding to LNAs in 2025
Given that FTS tracks humanitarian funding in close to real time,i there already exists preliminary 
data on the volumes and percentage of direct humanitarian funding reaching LNAs in 2025. 
Unfortunately, data on indirect funding from intermediaries reported to FTS has large gaps, 
and most of the data sources used in this chapter to provide a more comprehensive picture on 
funding through intermediaries (mostly UN partner reports) for the previous calendar year only 
become available after around 6–12 months’ delay. Data on funding through OCHA’s CBPFs in 
2025 is already available and covered in Chapter 3.
There might still be updates from the time of writing to the total funding reported to FTS 
for 2025, but there are clear indications even now of a notable drop in humanitarian funding 
compared to previous years. As of late February 2026, FTS data shows a drop in 2025 funding of 
almost $10 billion, or over a quarter (27%), compared to the previous year. This means that there 
was significantly less humanitarian funding available for all actors that year, whether international, 
national or local.
The share of direct funding reaching LNAs remained similar in 2025 compared to the previous 
two years at 4.4%, according to FTS data from late February 2026. Given the reduced volume 
of overall funding in 2025, this meant that the direct humanitarian funding volume to LNAs also 
decreased by about a quarter. The largest providers of direct funding to LNAs continued to be 
Gulf donors, with Saudi Arabia providing over 60% of this funding (mostly to the governments of 
Yemen and Syria), followed by the Qatar Fund for Development (10%) and the UAE (8%). Funding 
from the US to LNAs dropped from around $50 million annually between 2022 and 2024 to only 
a tenth of that ($5.4 million) in 2025. Another notable change is the doubling of direct funding to 
LNAs from the United Kingdom (UK) from around $20 million previously to $42 million in 2025, 
though concentrated among a small number of recipients, with half of that amount going to the 
Social Fund for Development in Yemen and the Aid Fund for Syria combined. 
i   FTS data on humanitarian funding in 2025 is still subject to change until at least the end of Q1 2026. However, 
the proportion of funding reaching LNAs directly is unlikely to change drastically by then, as there is no reason 
to believe that it would be systematically under- or over-reported to FTS relative to all other funding at the 
time of writing.
19
HPG report
The significant increase in funding volumes to local actors from 2021 ($1.0 billion) to 2022 ($3.2 billion) 
is due to newly available public data for the four aforementioned UN agencies on their funding to 
partners. Discounting this new data, the total funding to local actors still would have increased to 
$1.6 billion in 2022. The additional $1.5 billion in funding to local actors that year from those four UN 
agencies due to newly available data clearly shows the importance of change within the UN system in 
advancing localisation commitments. Those four UN agencies absorbed over half (56%) of total global 
humanitarian funding in 2022, according to the dataset underlying this analysis.
Local and national NGOs were the largest funding recipient type among local actors almost all years 
from 2019–2024, receiving on average around half of funding to LNAs each year. Only in 2020, local 
and national governments received a greater share of funding compared to other local actors due to 
unusually large volumes of funding in support of their Covid-19 responses. The United Arab Emirates 
(UAE) alone reportedly provided in-kind assistance with a nominal value of over $300 million to various 
governments that year. The average share of total funding to local actors received by local and national 
NGOs was around half both before and after UN partner data became publicly available.
Local and national governments consistently received slightly more than a third of total funding to 
LNAs according to available data from 2022 to 2024. In previous years, those volumes fluctuated more 
strongly, often driven by large swings in funding reported by Gulf government donors to national 
governments, usually in the Middle East and North Africa region.
RCRC National Societies operating in the countries they are headquartered in received around 10% of 
total funding to LNAs in most years. There is an outlier in the 2023 data, when RCRC National Societies 
received 20% of total funding to local actors that year. This was largely driven by the Lebanese Red 
Cross and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent both reporting the receipt of large volumes of funding (over 
$220 million each) that year, mostly channelled to them through the RCRC Network.
1.3 How funding reached LNAs
Even with our updated dataset, we found no crisis context with a Humanitarian Response Plan (HRP) 
in which LNAs received 25% or more of international humanitarian funding between 2022 and 2024 
(Figure 4). The three contexts in which local actors and national actors received the largest amounts of 
humanitarian funding were large-scale humanitarian responses between 2022−2024 (Yemen, Ukraine 
and Syria), though the share of funding received by those actors differs across contexts.
20
HPG report
Figure 4 Funding to LNAs in the top recipient countries of humanitarian funding to LNAs, 2022–2024
1,643
1,369
866
593
482 462
446 383 375346 321 286 241 169 173 167 174 151 132 119
20
11
9
13
5
9
6
10
6
10
6
12
19
10
11
3.5
9
10 9
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
1,800
2,000
YemenUkraine
Syria
Lebanon
Afghanistan
SomaliaPalestine
DRC
EthiopiaTürkiyeSudan
Bangladesh
PakistanJordan
Colombia
South Sudan
Chad
Burkina Faso
KenyaNigeria
Humanitarian funding to LNAs (US$ millions)
Share of total funding to LNAs (%)
Direct and indirect funding to LNAs 2022–2024
Share of funding (%) received by LNAs 2022–2024
Source: OCHA’s FTS, IFRC Network Database, IOM Grant Awards Data, OCHA CBPF Data Hub, UNICEF Transparency 
Portal, UNHCR Collaboration with Funded Partners, WFP Field-Level Expenditures Data.
Notes: Funding figures are aggregated over the 2022–2024 period. Total funding to each country for the share of 
funding received by LNAs is calculated using OCHA’s FTS. Data is in constant 2023 prices. 
LNAs in Yemen received the largest volumes of humanitarian funding between 2022 and 2024, making 
up one fifth of total humanitarian funding to Yemen in that period. This is mostly due to Saudia Arabia 
reporting over $1 billion in direct support to various ministries of the Yemeni government, with UNICEF 
and the UK government also reporting around $240 million in funding to the Yemeni Social Fund for 
Development. Not captured in Figure 4 is international development funding to the Social Fund for 
Development from, for example, the Arab Fund ($8 million in 2020–2021) or Germany ($6 million 
in 2021–2022), showing the fluidity between humanitarian and development resources supporting 
domestic actors’ crisis response.
In Ukraine, it was an near-even split between funding going through the government ($748 million) 
and local/national NGOs ($828 million) from a variety of donors including governments, UN agencies 
and the Ukraine CBPF. Ukraine is a special case given that international donors, notably the US,
21
HPG report
European Union (EU) institutions and Germany, channelled over $13 billion of official development 
assistance (ODA) annually to the Ukrainian government between 2022 and 2024 (OECD, 2026). Most 
of that funding is not reported as humanitarian assistance and therefore not captured in the dataset 
underlying the analysis in Figure 4. On the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) Development Assistance Committee (DAC) reporting platform, this funding is reported under 
the sectors for general budget support or public administration and finance, which are separate from 
the humanitarian DAC sector. It is not possible to discern how much of this funding the Ukrainian 
government may have used for humanitarian assistance domestically, but this case shows the vital 
importance in terms of scale and flexibility of broader crisis finance in support of governments 
coordinating domestic humanitarian crisis responses.
In Syria, funding to LNAs was almost entirely channelled to local/national NGOs ($350 million) and the 
Syrian Red Crescent ($32 million). Over half of that funding to local/national NGOs came from the Syria 
Cross-border Humanitarian Fund (SCHF) CBPF.
Pakistan also stands out with LNAs receiving a high share of humanitarian funding between 2022 
and 2024 of almost one-fifth (19%), again driven by Gulf donors. The UAE and Saudi Arabia combined 
provided around $56 million to the Pakistani government, including $34 million of in-kind assistance by 
the UAE. UNHCR and UNICEF were also significant donors to LNAs in Pakistan, with both providing a total 
of $38 million to the government and UNHCR providing $47 million to local/national NGOs in that period.
Local actors received around 5% or less in many countries with HRPs between 2022 and 2024, with the 
lowest shares in Cameroon (2.2%), the Central African Republic (3.3%) and South Sudan (3.8%). The 
gaps in our data on funding through INGOs means the actual percentages might be slightly higher in 
those contexts.
While the newly updated dataset underlying this analysis by country is now more comprehensive 
than ever before (see section 1.1 outlining data availability), further investigation at the country level is 
required to explore the reasons driving the differences between the shares of funding reaching LNAs in 
different contexts, through an often similar set of intermediaries. 
Owing to their size, UN agencies were the largest providers of funding to LNAs between 2022 and 2024, 
followed by Gulf donors and OCHA’s CBPFs. According to newly available data, UNHCR ($2.1 billion) 
and UNICEF ($1.9 billion) were the first- and third-largest providers of funding to LNAs across those 
three years (Figure 5). WFP was the sixth-largest provider of funding to local actors with $413 million, 
around a fifth of UNHCR’s or UNICEF’s volumes, despite WFP receiving more humanitarian funding than 
both those agencies over the three years.4 IOM provided $218 million to LNAs between 2022 and 2024 
4 WFP data in our analysis only includes field-level agreements with NGOs and therefore might underestimate 
the amount of humanitarian funding WFP passed on the LNAs due to excluding partnerships with governments.
22
HPG report
according to our calculations. Relative to the overall humanitarian funding that those four UN agencies 
received between 2022 and 2024, their shares of humanitarian funding to LNAs were 17% for UNICEF, 
13% for UNHCR, 3.0% for IOM and 1.5% for WFP.5
Figure 5 The 10 largest providers of direct and indirect funding to LNAs, 2022–2024
UNHCR
US$2,067m
Saudi Arabia
US$1,929m
UNICEF
US$1,871m
OCHA 
CBPFs
US$1,027m
RCRC Movement
US$948m
UAE
US$720m
WFP, US$413m
INGOs, US$387m
Poland, US$286m
IOM, US$218m
All other donors, US$823m
United Nations organisation
National government
RCRC Movement
INGO
Source: OCHA’s FTS, IFRC Network Database, IOM Grant Awards Data, OCHA CBPF Data Hub, UNICEF Transparency 
Portal, UNHCR Collaboration with Funded Partners, WFP Field-Level Expenditures Data.
Notes: Funding figures are aggregated over the 2022–2024 period. All OCHA CBPFs are combined into the CBPF 
category in the graph. Data is in constant 2023 prices.
5 T here are different approaches UN agencies and other intermediaries take to calculate the percentage of funding 
they pass on to LNAs, at times excluding from the denominator humanitarian funds used for core mandate 
activities or only considering funding available for partners. Our approach is to simply divide the amount of 
humanitarian funding provided to LNAs by all received humanitarian funding (including, subject to data availability, 
unearmarked funding used for humanitarian activities). Our reasoning is that the Grand Bargain commitment of 
providing at least 25% of funding to LNAs applies to all humanitarian funding from signatories globally.
23
HPG report
Saudi Arabia ($1.9 billion) and the UAE ($720 million) ranked second and sixth, respectively, in terms 
of the largest providers of humanitarian funding to LNAs between 2022 and 2024, mostly due to large 
volumes of assistance given directly to specific governments in the Middle East and North Africa region 
(see also Box 3). The largest recipient of Saudi support was the Yemeni government with over $1.0 
billion between 2022 and 2024. Saudi support to the Ukrainian government – in the form of petroleum 
products for power generation with a reported value of $300 million in 2022 (according to FTS) – 
is a notable exception to Saudi Arabia’s focus on LNAs in the Middle East and North Africa region. 
The largest recipient countries of UAE’s support to LNAs were the occupied Palestinian territories 
($135 million), Lebanon ($126 million) and Türkiye ($99 million). A large share of the UAE’s funding 
to those three governments was reportedly in the form of in-kind support of, for example, medical 
supplies, the construction of field hospitals or logistical services.
OCHA’s CBPFs directly provided $1.0 billion6 to LNAs between 2022 and 2024, exclusively channelled 
to local/national NGOs, with additional funding ($336 million) reaching LNAs as sub-grantees on CBPF 
projects.7 The SCHF provided the largest volume of funding to LNAs during that period ($179 million), 
followed by the Ukraine CBPF ($135 million) and the Somalia CBPF ($110 million).
According to available data, the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement provided 
$948 million to LNAs between 2022 and 2024, with 93% of that amount directed to RCRC National 
Societies. The largest individual provider of funding within that is the UAE Red Crescent Society 
($287 million) based on FTS data – mostly providing in-kind support to the Syrian Arab Red Crescent 
Society ($225 million) in 2023. FTS was the primary source here because the IFRC Network Database 
only includes the donor organisation types, and not names, for all funding to RCRC National Societies.
Though funding from INGOs to LNAs is not yet comprehensively reported on publicly (see the 
Appendix), all INGOs in our dataset combined provided a total of $387 million to LNAs from 2022 to 
2024, almost entirely directed to local/national NGOs (97%). The largest providers in that donor group 
were the Rahma International Society ($60 million), CARE ($35 million) and GOAL ($13 million).
6 This figure is in constant 2023 prices to account for inflation and might therefore differ from the figures in 
Chapter 3, which are in current prices to more closely align with the CBPFs’ own calculations.
7 Between those two funding amounts of CBPF allocations to LNAs and funding received by LNAs as sub-
grantees on CBPF projects, around US$50 million are double-counted across those three years in cases where 
national NGOs are the recipients of CBPF allocations and providers of sub-grants to other LNAs.
24
HPG report
Box 3 Data on direct funding to LNAs from government donors
There is a notable dearth of government donors that are also Grand Bargain signatories in the 
top 10 providers list in Figure 5. The total amount of direct funding to LNAs by all government 
donors that are also signatories in our dataset amounts to only around $0.5 billion from 2022 
to 2024, which even when combined would not be enough to place in the top five donors of 
funding to LNAs in that period. In the latest Grand Bargain self-reports, a total of only $77 million 
was reported as going directly to LNAs from governments. This cumulative figure came from 
only half of the government signatories; those remaining either did not track this internally or do 
not provide any direct funding to those actors. The main reason for those low volumes of direct 
funding to LNAs is that most of those government donors seek to progress their localisation 
commitments by relying on intermediaries to pass on their funding to LNAs. OCHA’s CBPFs are 
the most referenced intermediary of choice in those donors’ Grand Bargain self-reports, with 
some donors including an emphasis on passing on funding to LNAs in their strategic partnerships 
with INGOs.
Government donors therefore play a considerably smaller role in advancing transparency and 
accountability on localising humanitarian funding than could be expected given their decision-
making power over where and to whom to direct funding, even if most donor budgets are under 
pressure. There is only a small number of government donors that systematically track and 
publish their volumes of direct funding to LNAs. Many of the largest humanitarian government 
donors already publish data on their funding to the International Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI) 
standard (Publish What You Fund, 2024), but the recipient organisation types within IATI are not 
yet aligned with the agreed Grand Bargain definitions of LNAs, and ingesting data from IATI to 
FTS continues to be a work in progress.
Government donors should improve on their internal tracking and public reporting of direct 
funding to LNAs, aligned with Grand Bargain definitions and interoperable with, if not directly 
reported to, OCHA’s FTS. Those government donors relying on intermediaries to advance on 
localisation should also set out clear requirements on the public reporting of disaggregated 
data by those intermediaries on their pass-through funding, again aligned with Grand Bargain 
definitions and to public aid reporting platforms.
1.4 Comparison of UN funding to LNAs and Grand Bargain  
self-reports using public datasets
The self-reported amounts of funding to LNAs from UN actors show small differences for four of the 
five agencies from those based on independently verifiable data analysed for this report, but they differ 
greatly for WFP. The aggregate nature of the Grand Bargain self-reports makes it challenging to fully 
understand the reasons behind the differences visualised in Figure 6.
25
HPG report
Figure 6 Comparison of Grand Bargain self-reporting and HPG analysis of independently verifiable 
datasets on funding to LNAs, 2024
654 555
410 332
1,353
260 329 334
94 65
783
674 659
582
1,815
129
119
249
250
462
261 1
4 2
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
1,800
2,000
GB HPG GB HPG GB HPG GB HPG GB HPG
UNHCR UNICEF WFP UN OCHA CBPFs IOM
Direct funding (US$ millions)
Direct funding to local/national non-state actors
Direct funding to local/national state actors
329 334
6798
Source: IOM Grant Awards Data, OCHA CBPF Data Hub, UNICEF Transparency Portal, UNHCR Collaboration with 
Funded Partners, WFP Field-Level Expenditures Data, Grand Bargain self-reporting datasheet.
Notes: GB: Grand Bargain self-reported figure. HPG: Figure calculated by authors based on publicly available data. 
Funding data is in current prices. For more detail on the data sources for HPG’s analysis of UN funding to partners, 
see the Appendix.
The volume of funding to LNAs provided by WFP in its Grand Bargain self-report is almost seven times 
as much as we calculate based on publicly available data, with the latter not capturing most funding 
through governments that is included in the former. But even if we limit the focus on funding to local/
national NGOs, WFP’s self-reported figure is still over five times as large as that calculated based on 
WFP’s publicly available data for this report. The stark difference between the two sets of WFP funding 
data in Figure 6 raises a question as to what extent the self-reported amounts align with the Grand 
Bargain definitions. However, our understanding is that WFP might revise the methodology to calculate 
the funding it provides to LNAs for future self-reports.
Part of the explanation for the large differences is likely to be, as per WFP’s explanatory comments on 
its Grand Bargain reporting, that self-reported figures also include the value of food and cash transfers
26
HPG report
channelled through those actors. The figure calculated by HPG is based on the total value of field-level 
agreements with mostly NGO partners (see Appendix), and to our knowledge excludes the value of 
food or cash assistance channelled through them. The caucus on funding for localisation, which closed 
in March 2023, stated in its outcome document that neither in-kind assistance to LNAs nor the delivery 
of cash assistance should count towards the commitment of increasing funding to LNAs (Grand Bargain 
and DI, 2023), though WFP is among the few signatories not to endorse this caucus’ outcomes (Grand 
Bargain, 2026). Other methodological choices employed in this report might drive further, smaller 
differences, such as the exclusion of field-level agreements under what we classified to be development 
sectors (e.g. smallholder agricultural market support activities).
For UNICEF and UNHCR, the self-reported amounts of funding to LNAs are around 15% higher than 
calculated based on publicly available, granular data for this report. Again, it is difficult to get to the 
bottom of those differences given the aggregate nature of Grand Bargain self-reports. UNHCR’s 
comments on its self-report help to clarify, to an extent: unlike WFP, it excludes cash or in-kind support 
to its partners. Both UNHCR and UNICEF include in their public datasets a classification of their partners 
by organisation type, including whether they are LNAs, which also helps with understanding their 
methodologies. We exclude small amounts of funding from LNA funding totals for what we identify to 
be internationally affiliated NGOs that in our opinion should be classified differently (see the Appendix), 
but those differences are not large enough to drive the discrepancies visualised in Figure 6. For UNICEF, 
we had to identify within its global dataset on partnerships what activities or partnerships should be 
classified as humanitarian based on our own methodology (in the Appendix). In previous years, UNICEF 
as per its reporting comments made this decision based on the source of funding for its partnerships, 
and given that the data on linking UNICEF’s incoming funding with outgoing funds to its partners is not 
available to us, this might be another reason behind the differences in Figure 6.
For IOM, even though the self-reported amounts of funding to LNAs are almost 50% larger than 
amounts calculated based on granular data for this report, the difference in volumes is small ($31 
million) compared to other UN actors. Once more we can only guess what drives those differences, 
which might be rooted in our methodological choices, such as the classification of partners as local/
national. In addition, IOM partnerships amounting to $30,000 or less are not included in its publicly 
available dataset, which might exclude IOM partnerships with smaller, community-based organisations 
from the publicly available data.
OCHA’s CBPFs have the closest match between self-reported amounts of funding to LNAs and those 
calculated based on independently verifiable data, with a difference of only around 1% (Figure 6). The 
CBPFs’ own online platform, which is updated in real time and retrospectively since the self-reports 
were produced, shows $333 million of direct funding to national NGOs at the time of writing, which 
is even closer to the $334 million calculated for this report. The remaining small difference can be 
explained by the additional inclusion of funding to RCRC National Societies in this report’s dataset. In 
the CBPFs’ own dataset, this funding is classified as being directed to the International Red Cross and
27
HPG report
Red Crescent Movement but not disaggregated further by which of those actors are international 
or national actors, and therefore not included under funding to LNAs. We added this level of 
disaggregation in the dataset underlying this report.
Recommendation: UN agencies to improve reporting on funding 
they pass on to other actors
Our analysis shows that based on newly available UN partner data for four UN agenciesi, they are 
combined the largest providers of humanitarian funding to LNAs owing to their size and large 
number of implementing partners. However, donors that rely on their intermediaries to progress 
their own localisation commitments often seem unable or unwilling to impose bilateral reporting 
requirements on UN agencies’ pass-through funding, perhaps due to an aspiration to be flexible 
donors. Our recommendation is therefore to embark on a collective effort, building on the 
existing partner data that some of the largest UN agencies already helpfully started to publish:
Government donors should mandate UN agencies engaged in humanitarian action through 
executive committee decisions or similar collective governance mechanisms to publish 
data on their funding partnerships in an accessible, timely and interoperable fashion.
This means publishing the data in easily machine-readable formats (e.g. CSV files) and closer 
to real time (currently, there is a delay of up to a year in UN partner data being published). For 
better interoperability, it should include a minimum set of standardised fields, including USD 
amount, year, country, recipient organisation name and recipient organisation type (matching 
Grand Bargain definitions). For dual-mandate organisations working across humanitarian and 
development assistance, the data should also include sectoral classifications that make this 
internal separation clear to data users.
Such a collective transparency effort by the UN system would also mitigate the need for bilateral 
reporting on partnerships to individual donors that request this information and hopefully reduce 
the reporting burden in the medium to long term.
i   UNHCR, UNICEF, WFP and IOM
28
HPG report
2 Quality of funding for LNAs
Quality funding refers to a range of practices and funding arrangements that enhance an organisation’s 
ability to deliver humanitarian response more efficiently, more effectively and more equitably. There 
is no strict definition of quality funding, and a Grand Bargain policy brief acknowledges: ‘predictable 
and flexible funding were presented separately across two different commitment areas […] in the 
intervening years, humanitarian organisations have repeatedly made the point that predictability needs 
to go hand in hand with flexibility’ (Grand Bargain, 2020).
However, there are a range of quality funding practices that go beyond this, including: funding duration, 
earmarking, flexibility to adapt, reporting requirements, manner and timeliness of disbursements, funding 
accessibility, and whether funding enables locally led response (DI and NRC, 2023). Many of these practices 
are not necessarily captured quantitatively in global reporting systems, and thus are not explored 
extensively in this report. However, grant duration, earmarking and the provision of overheads are 
analysed using available data that is often imperfect. Grant sizes are also analysed. Although grant sizes are 
a less cited property of quality funding, they are also relevant to the efficiency of humanitarian response.
It should also be noted that no determination is made regarding the drivers of providing quality funding 
to LNAs. As Barbelet et al. (2021) note, drivers of localisation are varied, and may relate to issues 
around access (for example, if international actors cannot get access to certain population), improving 
humanitarian response, leadership of donors and governments, and Grand Bargain commitments. While 
this chapter does not assess these drivers, they are nonetheless significant, as localisation does not 
automatically result in quality funding for LNAs. Indeed, one criticism is that localisation occurs through 
poor quality funding practices such as sub-contracting. The drivers and motivations of localisation may 
shape the quality of the funding provided to those actors.
2.1 Duration of grants to LNAs
One commonly cited aspect of quality funding is the duration of a grant, with multi-year funding 
considered to reduce the time spent on administration relative to humanitarian activities, to improve 
longer-term planning and to enable addressing needs in a more holistic way (NRC and DI, 2024). There 
is also evidence to suggest that multi-year funding supports organisational health and resilience, with 
one study finding that such funding led organisations to report efficiency gains in grant management, 
as well as higher staff retention (DI and NRC, 2019). The outcome document of the Grand Bargain 
Caucus on Quality Funding also required signatories to ‘commit to correspondingly increase the multi-
year funding received to their implementing partners, including local actors, and publicly report on 
that increase to the Grand Bargain’ (Grand Bargain, 2022). Therefore, the duration of grants to LNAs is 
particularly important to understand whether they receive funding that enables their work in the longer 
term, or adds extra constraints through short fundraising or project cycles.
29
HPG report
However, publicly available data on grant duration for humanitarian funding is difficult to obtain. 
FTS does not comprehensively capture grant duration, whilst the Humanitarian Programme Cycle 
Project Module operates based on a yearly planning cycle and so is not suitable for this analysis. The 
IATI data captures the duration of projects, which can sometimes serve as a proxy for the duration of 
project funding – however, organisation types are not coded consistently to enable the comparison of 
international actors and LNAs.
As part of HPG research on refugee-led organisations (RLOs) (see Sturridge et al., 2023; 2025), data was 
collected from donors and intermediaries on funding to RLOs, including duration of grants (see Figure 7). 
This data is not considered complete, nor necessarily representative of the whole humanitarian system. 
Further caution should be exercised when considering the results of the analysis as:
1. the dataset includes funding to RLOs, whether they are considered humanitarian or development;
2. the dataset includes RLOs in the Global North (and thus takes a different lens than other analyses in 
this report);
3. RLOs can be ‘international actors’, in theory.
However, the data does show how grant duration varies according to the type of provider organisation, 
and can be considered instructive of wider funding flows.
Figure 7 Median grant length to refugee-led organisations, according to type of provider organisation
Direct funding 
Indirect funding
0 5 10 15 20 25
From governments or foundations
From intermediary (not INGOs)
From INGOs
24 months
12 months
7 months
Median grant length (months)
Source: Data from analysis undertaken for Sturridge et al. (2025) 
Notes: Data primarily from a funding survey with donors and intermediaries. Whilst data availability on funding to 
RLOs has improved, tracking funding to RLOs is difficult, and therefore the dataset is inevitably incomplete. The graph 
above and exact figures should therefore be viewed as indicative only. N = 50 for direct funding (49 foundations),  
N = 139 for non-INGO intermediaries, and N = 231 for INGOs.
30
HPG report
It is important to be clear about what the data does and does not show. The data does not show the 
average length of funding to all RLOs (as analysis only examines RLOs with available funding data), nor 
does it show the difference in average duration of funding to RLOs versus other organisation types 
such as UN agencies or INGOs. However, the data does show how the duration of funding varies when 
it is provided directly and when it is provided indirectly, with the duration of indirect funding being far 
shorter than direct funding. For RLOs who received funding from an INGO, the grant duration was even 
shorter than other types of intermediaries.
This raises two points. First, direct funding from a government or foundation donor may be of greater 
quality in terms of grant duration to an LNA. The conclusion is that once funding passes through an 
intermediary, the quality of the funding degrades in terms of length, leaving LNAs with shorter grants 
(Oxfam, 2018). Second, given that the majority of funding provided to LNAs is indirect in nature (see 
Chapter 1), then the majority of LNA funding through traditional donors and intermediaries is likely to 
be short term, and not multi-year. 
If the humanitarian sector is to increase the quality of funding to LNAs in terms of duration, there are 
two pathways to this. Either more funding needs to go direct from governments and foundations to 
LNAs (although given the current state of direct funding, this seems unlikely in the short term), or 
funders and intermediaries need to further consider grant duration as a key component of providing 
funding to LNAs. 
Furthermore, the quality of funding that an intermediary passes on may be a function of the quality of 
funding they receive – i.e. if an intermediary receives a short-term grant from a donor, it is then not able 
to commit to multi-year funding to LNAs. Thus, it is also important to consider whether donors support 
intermediaries to be in a position to commit to multi-year funding.
2.2 Grant sizes to LNAs
There is also variability in the grant sizes that UN agencies give to INGOs compared to local and national 
NGOs. As noted in a 2019 paper on pooled funds, the practice of smaller grants for LNAs raises the 
question of ‘whether a high number of small projects is a more efficient and effective way of providing 
assistance on the ground than a smaller number of larger projects’, in particular as the data for CBPFs 
suggested that ‘larger grants have lower average overhead costs per dollar allocated’ (Els, 2019: 18). In 
addition to the economies of scale argument, smaller grants to LNAs may also be indicative of the risk 
that UN agencies perceive with regards to different implementing partners.
Figure 8 shows that all five UN agencies analysed gave bigger grants on average to INGOs compared to 
national NGOs. The difference is largest for UNHCR, where the average grant size for a national NGO 
was $198,000, compared to $564,000 for an INGO (2.9 times larger). The gap between average grant 
sizes was smaller for the other UN agencies analysed, with the gap between average grants sizes for 
IOM, UNICEF and WFP around $60,000. OCHA’s CBPFs give on average a much larger grant to a local 
and national NGO compared to other UN agencies ($477,000), although INGOs still receive a larger
31
HPG report
grant on average, by about a fifth.8 This supports other literature that finds a differential in grant sizes 
by organisation types, with grant sizes for RLOs ($35,000) and LNAs ($88,000) smaller than for UN 
agencies ($320,000) (Sturridge et al., 2025).
Figure 8 Average grant size awarded by UN agencies for national and international NGOs
IOM
UNICEF
UNHCR
WFP
OCHA: CBPFs
 0  200  400  600  800  1,000  1,200  1,400
Local and national NGOs
International NGOs
Local and national NGOs: 50% range
International NGOs: 50% range
Median grant size (US$ thousands)
Source: IOM Grant Awards Data, OCHA CBPF Data Hub, UNICEF Transparency Portal, UNHCR Collaboration with 
Funded Partners, WFP Field-Level Expenditures Data
Notes: Data includes grants awarded between 2022 and 2024. In order to allow comparability between years, the 
grants have been deflated to constant 2023 prices. Sub-grants from CBPFs are not included. The ranges show the 
typical range of grants to that organisation (i.e. 50% of the grants fall within this range).
8 T he figures here differ from those in Chapter 3 as this chart analyses data across multiple years (2022–2024) in 
order to capture all data published by UN agencies with regards to grants to partners.
32
HPG report
Despite the average grant size for national NGOs being consistently below that of international NGOs 
for grants from UN agencies, there is a wide range of grant sizes. Figure 8 shows the interquartile 
range (middle 50%) of grant values for national and international NGOs. There are a few implications 
of the ranges shown. On the one hand, there is significant overlap between the two ranges across all 
UN agencies – this shows that whilst the average is consistently lower, there will be many cases where 
national NGOs receive more than INGOs, and being an INGO doesn’t guarantee a higher grant amount. 
However, the upper bound for INGOs is indeed significantly higher for all agencies (e.g. the 75th 
percentile for UNHCR for local and national NGOs was $572,000 compared to $1.3 million for INGOs). 
This implies that the ceiling for an INGO grant is much higher than that for a local or national NGO.
2.3 Earmarking of LNA funding
As part of efforts to improve the quality of humanitarian funding, the Grand Bargain committed 
signatories to reduce the earmarking of donor contributions. Earmarking is the practice of funders 
directing funding to specific projects, objectives and thematic priorities, or geographies. By contrast, 
funding that is more flexible is less tied to these parameters, and may look more like core funding to 
organisations, or to pooled funds (or only ‘softly’ earmarked to a CBPF), or with only small limitations 
on the use of funding. 
The rationale behind more flexible funding and less earmarked funding is underlined in the Grand 
Bargain text itself, namely: more timely humanitarian response in sudden-onset crises as well as 
response in protracted crises, strengthened decision-making and greater ability to adapt to changes in 
the context for implementers, improved organisational systems, and lowered administrative costs. A 
full classification of the four categories of earmarking (unearmarked, softly earmarked, earmarked, and 
tightly earmarked) was defined by the Grand Bargain (IASC, 2016).
Since 2019, data availability on earmarking has improved greatly – in 2018, 24% of the funding volume in 
FTS was tagged as earmarked or not. In 2019, this improved and 80% of the funding volume was tagged. 
By 2024, this improved again to 97% of funding being tagged with an earmarking classification. This 
improvement in data completeness allows analysis of earmarking from 2019 onwards (see Figure 9).
However, the improvement in completeness of data may not have been matched by a likewise 
improvement in the quality of data provided. For example, examination of one EU funding flow (flow 
ID 307853) claims the flow is ‘unearmarked’ but the description notes that it is to be used for ‘school 
repairs in Ukraine’, thus implying that the funding was tightly earmarked. Another funding flow 
from Saudi Arabia (flow ID 282098) claims that the $300 million flow is unearmarked, but it is tied 
specifically to Ukraine and is to be used for ‘providing petroleum products for power generation for 
Ukraine electric stations’. This points to an inconsistent interpretation of the Grand Bargain earmarking 
classifications across data reporters and thus, when flows are labelled ‘unearmarked’ on FTS, this may 
not always accurately reflect the flexibility of that funding on the ground. This would mean that there 
may be funding labelled as ‘unearmarked’ or ‘softly earmarked’ but that is in practice more restrictive, 
but more unlikely the other way around.
33
HPG report
A look at the Grand Bargain self-reports may further demonstrate this discrepancy. EU/European Civil 
Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations (DG ECHO) reported that 98.58% of its humanitarian 
funding was tightly earmarked in 2024 – this contrasts with only 2% reported as tightly earmarked on 
FTS, with 59% reported as earmarked and 32% reported as softly earmarked. At the same time, there 
are donors whose reported earmarking on FTS more closely aligns with Grand Bargain self-reports – for 
example, the Netherlands reports 52% of funding as unearmarked to the Grand Bargain self-reports, the 
same percentage as found in FTS. 
Any analysis of the flexibility of funding using FTS needs to be seen within the context of varied data 
quality. For the following analysis, the percentage that is labelled as earmarked or tightly earmarked is still 
examined. This is because there is no particular incentive to report funding as more restrictive – indeed 
the incentive is in the other direction given commitments on providing quality funding. Therefore, the 
percentages below are not viewed as precise, but lower bounds as to flexible funding practices.
The majority of funding analysed (using FTS) is earmarked, but to varying extents for LNAs versus 
international actors. Since 2020, the percentage of funding going to LNAs that was earmarked or tightly 
earmarked has been greater than the equivalent percentages for international actors. 
This ‘earmarking gap’ has existed since 2020, with international actors receiving less tightly earmarked 
funding than LNAs. However, the earmarking gap in 2024 was far greater – 85% of funding to LNAs 
was earmarked or tightly earmarked, compared to only 62% for international actors. Yet, given the 
varied data quality, these percentages should be treated with caution. It should also be noted that 
international actors also have their own mandates and priorities, and thus earmarking may occur when 
funding passes through these organisations to LNAs.
The topline figures mask different drivers behind the earmarking gap. Across the total period analysed 
(2019 to 2024), 75% of the funding to international actors with available data on earmarking was 
from OECD DAC donors to either UN agencies, INGOs, UN pooled funds, or the RCRC. This contrasts 
with funding flows to LNAs across the same period, which were driven by different donor–recipient 
relationships.
34
HPG report
Figure 9 Proportion of humanitarian funding that is earmarked, by type of recipient
69
65 67
79
57
85
74
58
63 64
53
62
0
20
40
60
80
100
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Local and national actors
International actors
Proportion of humanitarian funding earmarked (%)
Source: HPG, based on OCHA’s Financial Tracking Service (FTS).
Notes: Earmarking groups together both ‘tightly earmarked’ and ‘earmarked’. Flows with no earmarking stated are 
excluded from percentage totals.
Of the funding flows to LNAs across the same period:
• 52% was from non-mainstream government donors (such as Saudi Arabia and the UAE);9
 – Of this, 43% was to governments, and 9% to local/national NGOs;
• 16% was from CBPFs to LNAs in general;
• 5% was from DAC donors to governments.
These three types of funding flows constituted 73% of the total to LNAs. Thus, it is not the case that the 
same donors earmark differently for different types of recipients. The data shows that different donors 
are driving the funding mix for the different recipients, and therefore, LNA earmarking is potentially 
higher due to the different funding sources for LNAs. 
9 W e use the term ‘non-mainstream’ to refer to donors who are not part of OECD DAC. See section 4.3 for more 
on non-mainstream donors’ funding practices in relation to LNAs.
35
HPG report
For example, all funding from CBPFs is earmarked, whilst some non-mainstream donors heavily earmark 
their funding to LNAs (e.g. Saudi Arabia earmarked or tightly earmarked 93% of its LNA funding in 
2024). This is different from the DAC donor−UN recipient relationship, where 68% of funding was 
earmarked/tightly earmarked in 2024, whilst the DAC donor−INGO relationship had earmarking at 59%.
One prominent feature of the recent history of earmarking is its sudden increase in 2024 for LNAs. This 
specific instance is in large part due to an increase in funding to the government of Yemen from the 
government of Saudi Arabia (from $338 million in 2023 to $654 million in 2024), which also increased 
the percentage of that funding that was earmarked (from 14% to 96%). This example demonstrates 
both the effect that one actor providing a large amount of bilateral funding can have, as well as the 
change in data provided, and thus the volatility of trends in the data when there is a relatively limited 
pool of LNA funding.
As noted elsewhere in the report, many funding flows to LNAs are not detailed in FTS, specifically LNAs 
who are partners of UN agencies or INGOs. As much of UN and INGO funding to LNAs is centred on 
specific projects, it is therefore likely that earmarking of LNA funding is higher than that stated above, 
although without further data it is difficult to verify.
It is also important to note that UN partnership information and IFRC Network data does not include 
any data on the quality of funding to LNAs, including earmarking. Literature suggests that LNAs 
report that decisions are made by donors and first-level recipients, meaning that funding is also more 
earmarked when it reaches them (Oxfam, 2018). This further underscores the importance of reporting 
to public platforms in common formats in order to improve the transparency of the quality of funding 
to LNAs, particularly given the large role intermediaries play in funding LNAs. 
2.4 Provision of overheads to LNAs
The provision of overheads by donors and intermediaries to LNAs is a key component of quality 
funding. With overhead costs included in budgets, organisations can build organisational reserves, 
sustain and invest in human resources, deliver during gaps in funding, respond rapidly to crises, and 
invest in compliance, risk management and safety and security.
A recent HPG paper has found that 40 organisations now have policies or guidance in relation to the 
provision of overheads for LNAs, a large increase on 8 organisations in 2022 (Hassanein and Pearson, 
2026; see also DI, 2022). Despite the progress in recent years, gaps in overheads policy continue to 
persist, including: inadequate overhead costs provided, inconsistent flexibility offered by donors, and 
uneven and inequitable practice both across and within organisations. This is despite the guidance 
from the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) that provides recommendations on how to improve 
policy and practice (IASC, 2022).
36
HPG report
A full analysis of the current state of overheads provision, as well as a mapping by organisation, can be 
found in the HPG paper How underfunding local organisations’ overheads undermines humanitarian 
action (Hassanien and Pearson, 2026).
Recommendation: Agree and publicly report on narrow quality 
funding criteria
The above analysis presents some of the many aspects of quality funding relevant to humanitarian 
actors, including LNAs. It also shows the paucity of publicly available data on the humanitarian 
funding to LNAs. We therefore recommend that:
Donors and intermediaries should agree with LNAs on a narrow set of the most important 
quality funding criteria to those actors and report on those publicly.
Within the Grand Bargain, the discussions around quality funding have focused on the level of 
earmarking and timeframe of funding. However, the agreed earmarking definitions were primarily 
framed by international actors and are less relevant to local and national ones. More recently, 
the provision of overheads has gained prominence as quality funding criteria where LNAs were 
missing out compared to international actors.
The next steps to progress the goal of better quality funding are: (1) agreeing on what aspects  
of quality funding are most relevant to LNAs to enable more locally led responses; and  
(2) defining those aspects clearly and integrating reporting on them into existing interagency 
reporting platforms.
37
HPG report
3 Pooled funds and funding to LNAs
Pooled funds have been at the centre of the humanitarian policy debate in the wake of funding cuts 
experienced across 2024 and 2025. In March 2025, the Emergency Relief Coordinator (ERC), Tom 
Fletcher, said that he was asking Humanitarian Coordinators to ‘prioritize local and national partners 
for funding from pooled funds’, with OCHA assessing how CBPFs and the Central Emergency Response 
Fund (CERF) could be ‘strategically aligned with the humanitarian reset’ (OCHA, 2025b). 
However, despite the alignment of OCHA-managed pooled funds with the humanitarian reset, there 
are also other pooled-fund mechanisms, such as UN-led pooled funds, NGO-led pooled funds, refugee-
led pooled funds, feminist funds and others. The diversity of pooled funds is also reflected in the 
diversity of funding practices, such as who receives funding, how flexible that funding is, governance 
arrangements, and the quality of the funding.
This chapter will examine the funding data around OCHA’s CBPFs specifically, as well as Regional 
Humanitarian Pooled Funds (RHPFs), which are hosted at a regional level and disburse funding to 
countries within that region. It should be noted that OCHA now uses the term ‘Country and Regional 
Funds’ instead of CBPFs – however, for ease of reference, these will be referred to collectively as CBPFs.
This chapter will not examine OCHA’s CERF, which is designed to only give direct funding to UN 
agencies, with only 12% of CERF funding sub-granted to LNAs in 2023 (OCHA, 2025c). Chapter 4 will 
briefly examine non-OCHA managed pooled funds and the growing prominence of other pooled funds 
as vehicles for meeting humanitarian needs and getting funding to LNAs. 
The chapter provides a broad historical overview of the extent to which CBPFs localise funding. 
However, developments regarding the allocation of funding from the US towards the CBPFs are 
ongoing. All information and analysis is accurate at the time of writing.
3.1 Do CBPFs work for LNAs?
CBPFs have disbursed over $10 billion in funding over a decade and a half, with 23 countries receiving 
funds last year. Despite the success of CBPFs in becoming a vehicle for funding, analysis shows that, 
prior to 2026, this funding was actually in decline in real terms. In 2022, $1.3 billion was disbursed by 
CBPFs, declining to $910 million (using constant prices to account for inflation), in significant part due 
to a decrease in contributions from Germany (ALNAP, 2025). In recent years, the top three donors to 
CBPFs were Germany, the Netherlands and the UK.
The policy context for CBPFs in regard to localising funding started to change in 2025 with the funding 
cuts. In May 2025, the ERC floated the idea of one third of donor funding going to CBPFs (OCHA, 
2025d); and in June 2025, he said that ‘my aspiration as ERC is to reach 50% [of funding to be pooled 
funding], with 70% of that for local actors’ (IASC, 2025).
38
HPG report
However, in late 2025, the context shifted rapidly. The US government announced the signing of a 
memorandum of understanding with OCHA and pledged ‘an initial $2 billion anchor commitment 
to fund life-saving assistance activities in dozens of countries’ with the expectation that ‘over time, 
the Department of State expects all U.S. funding of UN humanitarian work to be channelled through 
OCHA pooled fund vehicles’ (US Department of State, 2025). At the time of writing, negotiations 
are still ongoing, and the expansion of US funding is still subject to agreements being signed and the 
operational readiness of the humanitarian system to utilise such funding. However, the implication of 
the potential injection of funding is that the decline in CBPFs will be reversed, with a large increase in 
funding from even the high watermark in 2022, whilst the US will become the primary donor to OCHA-
managed pooled funds and supplant the role of the three European donors who made up the majority 
of CBPF contributions in recent years. This could change the politics around CBPF governance in terms 
of who has power on CBPF advisory boards and thus the direction and operations of CBPFs.
The US announcement aligns with the direction of the humanitarian reset; the ERC has made OCHA-
managed pooled funds central to the reset (OCHA, 2025b), with the State Department stating that the 
agreement was ‘made in connection with OCHA’s “Humanitarian Reset”’ (US Department of State, 2025).
Given the renewed focus on pooled funds, and specifically OCHA-managed pooled funds, it is even 
more important to understand the opportunities and limitations of CBPFs in channelling quality 
funding to LNAs. 
Pooled funds can enable donors to meet localisation commitments, as they can increase access 
to funding for LNAs compared to government donors, sidestepping common issues that donors 
face (capacity to manage small grants where receiving organisations are registered, and high risk 
tolerances) (NRC, 2022). As contributions to OCHA are only softly earmarked they also allow decisions 
on funding allocations and priorities to be taken in-country by the relevant CBPF advisory board, 
allowing disbursements to be made quickly. Beyond the decision on country-level allocations, CBPFs 
can strip out donor preferences and allow decisions to be taken according to need as outlined in 
the HRP. Obtaining CBPF funding may also open the door to other funding opportunities, as passing 
assessments acts as a signal to other international actors regarding capacity. 
However, despite the well-noted benefits of CBPFs, there are also well-documented criticisms in 
relation to the quality of funding and access to funding. ICVA’s survey of NGO perspectives on pooled 
funds found that ‘a relatively low number of organisations, especially local and national NGOs, applied 
to a pooled fund mechanism’ (ICVA, 2024), whilst other studies note the lack of flexibility that CBPFs 
offer, with heavy due diligence, reporting and compliance requirements (NRC, 2022). 
Over the last decade, CBPFs have made significant progress in providing funding to LNAs (see Box 4 
on whether this means ‘direct’ or ‘indirect’). The percentage of allocations going direct from CBPFs to 
LNAs increased marginally between 2017 and 2022, increasing from 23% to 28% and thus staying around 
the Grand Bargain target of 25% going to LNAs (Figure 10). However, in recent years, that percentage 
has increased to 46% (as of 2025) – a significant increase from 18% a decade ago.
39
HPG report
Figure 10 Share of CBPF allocations going to LNAs, 2016–2025
18
23 25 25 26 26 28
30
35
46
23
28 29
31
34 34
36
39
46
55
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Share of total allocations (%)
Provided to local and national actors as direct from a CBPF
Provided to local and national actors as direct or indirect from a CBPF
Grand Bargain 25% target
ERC’s 70% reset aspiration
Source: OCHA
Notes: Data on funding direct from CBPFs from the CBPF Data Hub (extracted 22 February 2026), indirect funding 
data provided by OCHA (January 2026). Figures are in current prices and may change following publication.
CBPFs also allow grantees to sub-grant to other organisations. When including the sub-grant data, the 
percentage going direct and indirect from CBPFs to LNAs has increased from 23% in 2016 to 55% in 
2025. The main beneficiaries of sub-granting are national NGOs who have received 80% of CBPF sub-
grants in 2024 and 2025 (the vast majority from INGOs and UN agencies).
The large percentage going to LNAs, directly and indirectly from CBPFs, is a notable success, 
particularly in the context of the broader humanitarian sector that only managed to channel 9.5% of 
overall funding to LNAs in 2024. In this sense, CBPFs have proven better at getting funding to LNAs than 
other UN agencies (though most INGO data remains unclear).
40
HPG report
Box 4 Is funding from a CBPF direct or indirect?
‘Direct’ funding from a CBPF is actually indirect funding as it first passes through one intermediary 
(OCHA). We refer to funding going ‘direct from a CBPF’ to make the distinction that this does not 
fit within the Grand Bargain remit for ‘direct funding’.
What about ‘indirect funding’? Grand Bargain definitions state that indirect funding to LNAs 
only counts as such if it passed through a single intermediary (Grand Bargain and DI, 2023). So 
seemingly ‘indirect’ funding from a CBPF cannot be strictly considered as such for Grand Bargain 
monitoring purposes, as two intermediaries would be involved (OCHA, and the grantee, before 
eventually reaching the LNA). 
However, the headline numbers hide a more complex story underneath the surface. Despite the 
percentage of CBPF funding going to LNAs increasing in recent years, the volume of funding has shifted 
marginally. Whilst allocations between 2016 and 2022 increased from $166 million to $438 million, 
allocations since 2022 have fluctuated around this figure before rising to $506 million in 2025 (a notable 
increase from 2024, but not huge growth compared to volumes in 2022; see Figure 11). Therefore, the 
increase in the percentage going to LNAs is partly a consequence of overall funding to CBPFs going 
down in recent years.
On the one hand, this shows that CBPFs have made a choice to prioritise funding to LNAs despite cuts 
in funding and allocations. At the same time, this highlights a potential issue for CBPFs moving forward. 
If total allocations to LNAs have not increased substantially since 2022, this raises questions around 
the potential absorption capacity of CBPFs moving forward – the US government has pledged an initial 
$2 billion contribution to CBPFs, and potential future tranches. In other words, if CBPFs are stuck 
providing just over $400 million to LNAs directly, is it likely they will be able to provide hundreds of 
millions more in funding to LNAs immediately?
41
HPG report
Figure 11 Volume of CBPF allocations to LNAs, 2016–2025
132
163
207
254
240
271
336
344
329
426
33
34
32
64
66
78
102
99
98
80
166
198
240
318
306
349
438
443
427
506
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Volume of CBPF allocations (US$ millions, current)
Direct funding Indirect funding
Source: OCHA
Notes: Data on funding direct from CBPFs from the CBPF Data Hub (extracted 22nd February 2026, indirect funding 
data provided by OCHA (January 2026). Figures are in current prices and may change following publication.
3.2 Are all CBPFs financially supporting LNAs to the same extent?
Whilst the last section discusses CBPFs at the aggregate level, it is important to note that not all CBPFs 
localise funding – i.e. provide a large proportion of direct and quality funding to LNAs – to the same extent. 
Figure 12 shows the CBPFs that were active in 2025, together with allocations from RHPFs, with a wide 
range of practices across pooled funds, as well as trends over the last 10 years.
42
HPG report
Figure 12 Share of CBPF allocations going to LNAs, 2016–2025
Sudan Afghanistan CAR DRCRHPF-LAC
Proportion of total funding (%)
Lebanon Myanmar Nigeria oPt RHFP-WCA
South Sudan Syria Ukraine Y emen Ethiopia
RHPF-AP RHPF-ESA Somalia Syria Crossborder Venezuela
100
75
50
25
0
100
75
50
25
0
100
75
50
25
0
100
75
50
25
0
20162017201820192020202120222023202420252016201720182019202020212022202320242025201620172018201920202021202220232024202520162017201820192020202120222023202420252016201720182019202020212022202320242025
Direct
Flow type: Below Grand Bargain 25% target in 2025
Meets Grand Bargain 25% target in 2025
Meets ERC’s reset 70% aspiration in 2025Direct + indirect
Source: OCHA
Notes: Data on funding direct from each CBPF from the CBPF Data Hub, data on funding indirectly from each CBPF 
provided by OCHA. Figures are in current prices. RHPF = Regional Humanitarian Pooled Fund; CAR = Central African 
Republic; DRC = Democratic Republic of Congo; oPt = Occupied Palestinian Territories; LAC = Latin America and the 
Caribbean; WCA = West and Central Africa; AP = Asia-Pacific; ESA = Eastern and Southern Africa
43
HPG report
Of the 20 CBPFs that disbursed funding in 2025, six disbursed over 70% of funding directly to LNAs, 
thus meeting the 70% aspiration of the humanitarian reset.10 This includes pooled funds for Ethiopia, 
Venezuela, Syria and Somalia, which have all given over half of their funding direct to LNAs since 2023. 
RHPFs also require a disclaimer so as to avoid over-interpreting these specific figures. Two regional 
pooled funds, for the Asia Pacific and for East and Southern Africa, disbursed for the first time in 2025 
at low volumes ($1.6 million and $2.3 million, respectively), whilst the first year of data for the Latin 
America and Caribbean Fund was 2024. Therefore, it is perhaps too early to draw robust conclusions 
from the figures for these RHPFs compared to the CBPFs, which have been in operation over a number 
of years.
Somalia is a particular success story with a sustained improvement in allocations to LNAs over the 
last decade. During 2025, the Somalia Humanitarian Fund disbursed $44.9 million to 61 local partners 
directly – with more LNAs as partners, and more projects with LNAs than any other CBPF. However, 
as Barter and Sumlut (2023) argue, funding to LNAs in Somalia is typically ‘low quality localisation’ out 
of necessity, due to access constraints for international humanitarian actors, rather than a genuine 
commitment to locally led action. Perversely, LNAs are relegated to work in the most insecure locations 
across the country.
At the other end of the spectrum, Sudan is the only CBPF that fails to meet the target of 25% going to 
LNAs, whether direct or indirect from a CBPF. In fact, the trend has gone backwards in recent years: in 
2022, 12% of Sudan CBPF funding was localised, dropping to 1% in 2024. Despite this, there has been a 
gap growing between direct and indirect funding, demonstrating that international actors are continuing 
to localise funding from the CBPF, even if the CBPF is not doing so directly. There are specific contextual 
factors in Sudan that have constrained the ability to advance localisation, with Refugees International 
noting the impact of the civil war, the co-optation of some national NGOs by authorities, ‘the long 
suppression’ of civil society that impacted the organisational development of NGOs, as well as the risk 
of visibility that receiving funding for LNAs generates in the ‘politicised and violent environment’ (Noe, 
2025). It is therefore particularly important that the Sudan Humanitarian Fund places greater focus on 
localising funding, with a potential $700 million of funding from the US and UAE governments (reported 
$200 million and $500 million, respectively) (AP, 2026; US Embassy in Egypt, 2026).
Another 12 pooled funds sit in the middle: surpassing the Grand Bargain target of 25% funding going to 
LNAs, but not reaching the humanitarian reset ambition of 70%. This includes a range of CBPFs, with 
10 It is important to note that the language around the 70% figure is that it is an ‘aspiration’ of the ERC in line with 
the humanitarian reset. No timeline has been given for the target, and so it is assumed that CBPFs will seek 
to reach the target progressively over time with different implementation pathways and milestones for each 
individual pooled fund.
44
HPG report
some localising over 50% of their direct funding in 2025 (Nigeria: 69%, the Democratic Republic of 
Congo: 62%, Yemen: 59%, Ukraine: 58%, and Myanmar: 54%), with others closer to the Grand Bargain 
target (Afghanistan: 36%, Syria: 25%, and Central African Republic: 35%). 
Furthermore, there is a wide variation in trends over time. Some CBPFs have consistently increased 
their localisation percentage year-on-year for most of the past decade (such as the Democratic 
Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Nigeria and Yemen). Other pooled funds have improved in more recent 
years (such as Afghanistan, the Central Africa Republic, South Sudan and Ukraine). Other CBPFs show 
no discernible trend and have tended to oscillate over time (such as Lebanon and Syria).
The variation across CBPFs has a number of implications. Firstly, the common assertion that CBPFs 
are a way to meet localisation commitments for donors and that they enable localisation is not always 
true. At the aggregate level, CBPFs are shown to localise funding. But this is not true for every individual 
CBPF – some pooled funds do not meet the target, whilst others go far beyond the Grand Bargain 
target. If donors want to ensure their contributions do localise funding, they should pay specific 
attention to the practices of individual CBPFs. 
Secondly, not all CBPFs are moving in the right direction, The decline in recent years in Sudan may be 
a relative outlier, but there are also a number of other CBPFs that show no trend towards increasing 
funding to LNAs – attention needs to be paid to the trends for individual CBPFs to ensure gains are 
sustained across the board. 
Thirdly, the RHPFs are still in their infancy: three of the four regionally hosted pooled funds have been 
disbursing funds for less than two years. Only $39 million was disbursed in 2025 through these pooled 
funds, and whilst three out of four RHPFs meet the 25% target, this is with relatively low volumes. As of 
March 2026, $841 million has been contributed to RHPFs so far that year – a 21-fold increase on 2025, 
with the vast majority from the US ($830 million). As a result of the large increase in funding from 
the US, it is yet to be seen whether RHPFs can successfully manage large volumes of funding and still 
localise funding over the medium to long term (see Box 5 for more analysis).
Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, given the wide variation in practice across CBPFs, it is vital that 
best practice from funds leading the way on localising funding is understood. Research on what enables 
such ‘leader funds’ to get funding to LNAs should be conducted and disseminated to ensure that 
best practices can be implemented more widely, as well as to examine whether the quality of funding 
provided by such ‘leader funds’ empowers local organisations – this is of particular importance given 
the imminent growth of CBPF funding due to the surge in US input.
45
HPG report
3.3 Which LNAs receive CBPF funding?
Going one step beyond the individual CBPF, this section examines the recipient organisations of CBPF 
funding. Some studies have noted that the registration and application processes are long, onerous 
and complex, with a low proportion of organisations eligible to receive funding, and RLOs in particular 
finding it hard to secure funding (Concern Worldwide, 2024; Sturridge et al., 2025).
Given the barriers that LNAs may face in accessing CBPF funding, one question that arises is whether 
CBPF funding benefits a small number of LNAs (and therefore the benefits of localised funding are 
concentrated in the hands of a few), or whether CBPF funding is spread across many organisations and 
thus benefits a wider range of civil society (Figure 13).
Figure 13 Concentration of localised funding among the top 10 recipients by context, 2025
Source: OCHA
Notes: Based on funding direct from CBPFs only. RHPFs disaggregated into specific countries. Fewer than 10 LNA 
partners receive funding from a CBPF/RHPF in some cases – these are shown as 100% in the chart. The Syria cross-
border CBPF is excluded due to anonymised data. Sudan data is also anonymised; however, the CBPF allocations 
overview notes four partners in 2025. RHPF = Regional Humanitarian Pooled Fund; CAR = Central African Republic; 
DRC = Democratic Republic of Congo; oPt = Occupied Palestinian Territories; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; 
WCA = West and Central Africa; AP = Asia-Pacific; ESA = Eastern and Southern Africa
100
Proportion of localised funding 
allocated to the top 10 recipients (%)
94 91
85 81 80
76
68 65 63 60
53 52
47
33
CARSudan
RHPF-AP: Pakistan
RHPF-LAC: Haiti
RHPF-WCA: Burkina Faso
RHPF-WCA: ChadRHPF-WCA: MaliRHPF-WCA: Niger
RHPF-ESA: Mozambique
Syria
Venezuela
oPt
LebanonUkraine
South Sudan
YemenMyanmarEthiopia
DRC
Afghanistan
NigeriaSomalia
100
75
50
25
0
Pooled fund
46
HPG report
All but two contexts that received CBPF or RHPF funding in 2025 concentrated the majority of their 
direct localised funding (i.e. funding direct to LNAs) to 10 or fewer LNA recipients. 
On the one hand, the picture is slightly skewed at the top end, with contexts where 100% of localised 
funding going to the top 10 recipients also being those with a small overall volume of funding going to 
LNAs as a whole (less than $3 million in all eight contexts; the same is the case for Mozambique). This 
may be expected: where there is a low volume disbursed to LNAs and as a whole in these contexts, then 
it would make sense that not many organisations receive funding. 
However, across the remaining contexts, all but two give the majority of their localised funding to 
the top 10 recipients; only the Somalia and Ethiopia CBPFs have funding portfolios where the top 10 
recipients receive less than half of the localised funding.
At a global level, 67% of direct localised funding across all CBPF/RHPF allocations in 2025 went to the 
top 10 recipients across contexts (Figure 14). This has not changed across the last decade. Figure 14 
shows that there is no significant trend towards diversifying the partner base, with the percentage 
going to the top 10 recipients in each context fluctuating primarily around 70% and 80%. 
Figure 14 Global concentration of localised funding among the top 10 recipients in each context,  
2016–2025
86%
73% 71% 69%
80%
71% 67% 71%
77%
67%
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
100
80
60
40
20
0
Proportion of localised funding 
going to top 10 recipients (%)
Source: OCHA
Notes: Based on funding direct from CBPFs only. Sudan and Syria cross-border CBPFs excluded due to anonymised 
data.
47
HPG report
This does not necessarily indicate a shallow partner base, as those top 10 recipients could change 
year-on-year. However, further analysis showed the top 10 recipients in each context across the decade 
(2016 to 2025) received 55% of all direct localised funding (rising to 75% when expanding to the top 
20 recipients). In addition, the top 10 recipients in 2025 in each context were analysed to examine if 
they were also recipients in 2024 – 69% of these organisations received funding in 2024, with 52% 
also being in the top 10 recipients in 2024.11 Both of these points suggest that, whilst the partner base 
isn’t necessarily entirely static with some churn of partners between years, there remains a stable and 
concentrated partner base for CBPFs.
The concentration of local and national funding to a small number of actors in each context has a 
number of implications. First, it validates other literature that notes that LNAs have difficulty accessing 
funding, with a high concentration over time signalling a lack of improvements in diversifying the 
organisations receiving funding. However, one key gap is understanding who these organisations are 
and what type of organisations receive this funding – this is an area for potential further study.
Second, it suggests that whilst CBPFs are good at getting funding to LNAs, they may privilege a small 
number of organisations in each context. These may be organisations that are better able to meet 
monitoring, reporting and compliance requirements. Thus CBPFs may reinforce existing civil society 
leaders (potentially larger NGOs based in capital cities), disadvantage smaller and less ‘NGO-ised’ 
organisations (i.e. more local organisations embedded within communities), and thus reinforce existing 
barriers to funding and inequalities within civil society. This is not a criticism of the LNAs themselves, 
but rather a concentration of disbursements to a limited set of actors. This may also be a case of CBPFs 
not having their own capacity to manage a large number of contracts, and thus facing similar grant 
management constraints to government donors (albeit at the country level).
Third, whilst the concentration of CBPF funding can be seen as disadvantaging some LNAs, there is 
a potential trade-off with quality funding. Larger and longer-term grants implies funding going to a 
more narrow set of actors – whilst smaller grants with shorter duration implies funding going to a 
broader range of actors. This is a trade-off that doesn’t necessarily have a clear answer, but one worth 
acknowledging when considering the data above.
Lastly, this raises a question of absorption capacity. If CBPFs are to absorb a large amount of funding 
in the future due to an increase in US funding, then there is a potential risk that this benefits a small 
number of organisations to the exclusion of others. As noted in Box 5, it is anticipated that the US 
funding will go to UN agencies and large INGOs. 
11 This figure excludes CBPFs and RHPFs where no allocations were made in 2024, such as the RHPF allocations 
for Chad, Mozambique and Pakistan where allocations were only made in 2025 to local and national actors.
48
HPG report
Box 5 Do the CBPFs that the US selected for funding advance 
localisation?
In addition to the CERF, 18 countries have received US funding through CBPFs in 2026. As of mid-
April 2026, the percentage of all allocated CBPF funding going to LNAs has dropped to 19% (from 
55% in 2025), with the percentage going to UN agencies increasing substantially (from 5% in 2025 
to 52% in 2026).
These percentages will change through the year and should not be considered final. However, it 
is indicative of the change that CBPFs are undergoing in 2026. Analysis by The New Humanitarian 
shows that WFP, UNICEF, UNHCR and IOM are the primary beneficiaries of US funding through 
CBPFs and only 2% of US-specific funding goes to LNAs, whilst Devex has reported local 
organisations will end up receiving 13% of US funding (Loy, 2026a; Gawel, 2026). The New 
Humanitarian has also reported that allocations have been predetermined with LNAs being 
excluded from discussions around pooled fund allocations (Loy, 2026a). Reporting suggests that 
the implied reason behind the allocations to international actors is that ‘US cash is time-limited 
and must be spent within six months from a mid-March start date’ with few local organisations 
vetted to receive funds (Loy, 2026b). 
In the short term, it is clear that CBPFs will go backwards on localisation, with LNAs paying the 
price of greater US funding to OCHA. This is despite the fact that the majority of CBPFs within the 
US deal that disbursed funding last year gave at least 25% of funding to LNAs directly (see Table 1).
However, the 12 CBPFs that did disburse funding to LNAs in 2025 only disbursed $245 million 
in total – excluding Ukraine, this drops to only $127 million. With the aspiration of 70% of CBPF 
funding going to LNAs, and the small volumes going to LNAs across these pooled funds with 
relatively small partner bases, CBPFs need to consider building in greater absorption capacity in 
terms of funding LNAs.
If CBPFs are to meet both objectives of localising and absorbing more funding in the medium 
to long term, it will require significant planning and capacity (such as pre-qualifying more LNAs 
and more due diligence capacity), as well as the political will to ensure that localisation remains a 
priority in conversations with donors, primarily the US.
Countries that did not receive funding from a CBPF or RHPF in 2025, but which have been 
allocated funding, are: Bangladesh ($150 million), El Salvador ($25 million), Guatemala ($60 million), 
Honduras ($65 million), Kenya ($50 million) and Uganda ($75 million).
49
HPG report
Table 1 Contexts selected for the US’ $2 billion contribution to OCHA pooled funds
CBPF/RHPF
US contribution
Amount disbursed 
to LNAs (2025)
Percentage direct 
to LNAs (2025)
Percentage of 
LNA funding 
going to top 10 
LNAs (2025)
Ukraine $155 million $117 .5 million 58% 76%
Ethiopia $100 million $32.3 million 73% 60%
South Sudan $100 million $19.8 million 45% 68%
Myanmar $140 million $19.4 million 54% 63%
Democratic Republic 
of Congo
$150 million $18.5 million 62% 53%
Nigeria $125 million $13.5 million 69% 47%
Syria $150 million $12.4 million 25% 91%
Sudan $200 million $5. 1 million 4% 100%
RHPF-WCA – Chad $100 million $2.6 million 24% 100%
RHPF-ESA – 
Mozambique 
$80 million $2.2 million 95% 94%
RHPF-LAC – Colombia $100 million $1.2 million 100% 100%
RHPF-LAC – Haiti $125 million $0.3 million 12% 100%
Source: OCHA
Notes: Based on direct funding only – the total amount disbursed to LNAs as first-level recipients is included in 
the column on disbursements, including funding where the LNA disburses to a second-level recipient. The RHPFs 
have been disaggregated into specific countries. Sudan recipients anonymised in the source data. Data extracted 
across February, March and April 2026; 2025 figures are subject to change. RHPF = Regional Humanitarian Pooled 
Fund; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; WCA = West and Central Africa; ESA = Eastern and Southern Africa
3.4 Do CBPFs provide quality funding?
Whilst CBPFs are able to channel funding to LNAs, the quality of funding also matters to LNAs. This 
section examines three elements of quality funding that can be considered quantitatively – the duration 
of a CBPF grant, the size of a CBPF grant, and the provision of overheads. 
Data suggests that CBPFs are not at a disadvantage in terms of grant duration and don’t have shorter 
grants than international actors. Figure 15 shows that the average grant duration for national NGOs 
does not differ significantly from that of international actors, and in some years is actually higher. As 
the data also shows, average duration across all actors has increased across the past decade, rising 
from 211 days for national NGOs in 2016, to 303 days in 2025. However, according to guidance, any US 
contributions must be spent within six months, and thus it is almost certain that the grant durations will 
drop in the near future (Kiros, 2026).
50
HPG report
Figure 15 Average grant duration of CBPF allocations by organisation type, 2016–2025
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Average grant duration (days)
International NGO National NGO UN agency
Source: OCHA. Data extracted 22 February 2026.
Notes: Organisation type determined by the organisation receiving funding direct from a CBPF (i.e. this does not 
include sub-grants and indirect funding). 
Thus, national NGOs are not disadvantaged in this respect, which also aligns with the findings in 
ICVA’s NGO perspectives on pooled funds report which found that, whilst ‘respondents find [...] their 
experience with the fund to be average [in respect to the length of implementation periods] […] 
national NGOs reported a more positive experience than INGOs’ (ICVA, 2024). Having said this, the 
same report also notes the importance of advocating for multi-year funding which, as Figure 15 shows, 
is currently not the norm for CBPFs.
Another dimension to examine is the average grant size of allocations to local and national NGOs. As 
Figure 16 shows, the average grant size for a local/national NGO has been consistently below that of 
both INGOs and UN agencies across the last decade. In the most recent year of data, a local/national 
NGO receives an average grant of $400,000, compared to $502,000 for a UN agency, and $541,000  
for an INGO.
51
HPG report
Figure 16 Average grant size of CBPF allocations by organisation type, 2016–2025
350
350
361
361
400
450
515
600
615
541
252
266
300
325
400
392
453
490
450
400
450
562
479
475
500
562
896
952
650
502
100
129
112
152
150
162
114
104
350
276
77
79
81
102
111
94
79
108
148
130
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Direct:
LNNGO 
Direct:
INGO 
Indirect:
LNNGO 
Indirect:
INGO 
Direct:
UN 
Source: OCHA
Notes: Average grant size determined by the median of the subset. LNNGO = local and national non-governmental 
organisation; INGO = international non-governmental organisation; = UN = United Nations
52
HPG report
This gap in grant size is also replicated when CBPF funding is sub-granted. For all but one year in the last 
decade, a local/national NGO sub-grant is on average smaller than that for an INGO. In the most recent 
years, this gap has increased for indirect funding, with an average sub-grant of $130,000 to a local/
national NGO in 2025, compared to $276,000 for an INGO.
As the CBPF Global Guidelines note, ‘maximum grant ceilings are set out in the Operational Modalities 
for each Fund, regulated by the risk level assigned to any given partner and the project duration’ 
(OCHA, 2023). The risk level assigned to a given partner is determined by capacity assessment and 
project implementation performance. Thus, the difference in grant sizes likely reflects perceptions of 
risk regarding different organisations. The difference in grant sizes reflects the practice of other UN 
agencies as analysed in Chapter 1.
Lastly, CBPFs have a policy on the provision of overheads to grantees – whether those grantees are 
international or LNAs. Overheads to LNAs, termed ‘Programme Support Costs’ by OCHA, are provided 
up to 7%. Overhead costs are also provided to sub-grantees, with overhead costs shared in 87.2% of 
sub-granting cases in 2024, with 73.5% of sub-grantees receiving the full 7%, according to OCHA’s self-
reporting to the Grand Bargain (Grand Bargain Secretariat, 2025). Overhead costs are also provided as 
unrestricted contributions to partners’ overhead costs and do not need to be reported against.
Despite the presence of a policy on overheads (which is sometimes not the case for international 
actors), the application of the policy is not consistent. For example, on average, sub-grantees received 
5.2% of their allocated budget (ibid). Furthermore, as a synthesis paper by ICVA notes, overheads ‘rarely 
cover the full costs and remain inconsistent’ whilst there is ‘no evidence of CBPFs consistently advising 
organizations on how best to cover core costs’ (ICVA, 2023). 
Recommendation: CBPFs should publish roadmaps on achieving 
OCHA’s localisation goals
The renewed emphasis on OCHA’s CBPFs as key funding mechanisms for government donors to 
achieve their localisation commitments, coupled with the ERC aspiration of 70% of CBPFs’ funding 
reaching LNAs, warrants clear and pragmatic plans on how to reach those ambitious targets. The 
analysis in this chapter shows the range of starting points for CBPFs owing to context-specific 
differences in terms of funding landscape and stakeholders. CBPFs with a high concentration of 
their funding with a small number of LNAs may struggle to scale up rapidly. Our recommendation 
therefore is:
Each CBPF should publish time-bound roadmaps on how to achieve the ambitious 
localisation aspiration (of 70% of funding going to LNAs), including what is required from 
other humanitarian actors in each context.
53
HPG report
The ambitious 70% aspiration for the funding share to LNAs might require CBPFs to add new 
forms of support to its global operational handbook that promote LNAs’ access to CBPF funding, 
for example in the form of microgrants for smaller actors or through offering targeted support 
on developing necessary systems to meet due diligence criteria. The roadmaps should also 
reconsider the CBPFs’ tightly earmarked default funding approach and whether additional, more 
flexible funding modalities might be more effective in enabling more locally led responses.
54
HPG report
4 Who funds LNAs beyond the UN?
4.1 What does the limited data on NGO-led funds show on their role in 
advancing localisation?
There has been a proliferation in NGO-led funds and financing mechanisms in recent years as 
alternative or complementary funding channels for government donors that largely rely on 
intermediaries to progress on their localisation commitments. Even though various mappings of these 
initiatives exist, there is scarce disaggregated and publicly accessible data on the funding they receive or 
pass on to LNAs.
The most recent and comprehensive mapping carried out by ICVA in June 2025 lists 69 different 
NGO-led mechanisms, mostly comprising different types of pooled funds though also including nine 
consortia (ICVA, 2025a). They are mostly led or hosted by INGOs, while 19 of the included mechanisms 
identified as locally led. The mapping includes key characteristics on each mechanism including 
type, host organisation, contact details, descriptions, whether they are locally led or feminist in their 
institutional set-up, and more. However, there are notable gaps in the dataset, for instance on the 
estimated share of funding they provide to local or national NGOs. It is also difficult to track the 
fluctuating amounts of funding received or provided by each mechanism per year or over time with 
static datasets such as this mapping, which relied on ad hoc data collection. Still, it is a useful reference 
tool, a starting point for donors that might be interested in channelling their funding to LNAs through 
NGO-led or even locally led funds.
We were able to identify only seven of the 69 mechanisms from the ICVA mapping in our disaggregated 
dataset as providers of funding to other humanitarian organisations due to a lack of reporting. 12 For 
some of those seven, e.g. Save the Children’s Humanitarian Fund (also known as the Emergency Fund), 
this data was only partial. Many of the mechanisms identified by ICVA are hosted by various INGOs, 
meaning that those hosted funds may not be identifiable on FTS as separate recipient or donor 
organisations of funding. This makes it very difficult to quantify or identify by country the degree to 
which NGO-led funds manage to localise the international humanitarian funding landscape. However, 
we are aware of ongoing efforts by NGOs and NGO networks to improve the transparency of the 
funding they provide to or receive from partners. Recent work proposes better integration of FTS with 
IATI data so that NGOs sharing data to the latter can more easily report it to the former (ICVA, 2025b), 
improving the visibility on the important contributions that NGOs make to localising humanitarian 
responses.
12 The seven are: Aid Fund for Syria, Disasters Emergency Committee, Dutch Relief Alliance, Humanitarian Aid 
International, Save the Children’s Humanitarian Fund, Start Network and the Border Consortium.
55
HPG report
4.2 MDBs and localisation
The large volumes of funding disbursed by multilateral development banks (MDBs) have become 
increasingly alluring to humanitarian actors as the humanitarian funding gap has widened in recent 
years. Still, there remains confusion within the humanitarian sector on whether or how MDB financing 
is accessible to humanitarian agencies, and if so, the role of MDBs within crisis responses and the 
localisation of broader crisis finance. The $16.6 billion in disbursements between 2020 and 2024 
(Figure 17) reported by MDBs under humanitarian sector codes to the OECD DAC is almost entirely 
from the World Bank Group (97%), channelled through national governments (98%) and largely for 
disaster prevention and preparedness (87%). Looking beyond humanitarian financing from MDBs, 
World Bank’s International Development Association was also the largest provider of ODA for all 
development and humanitarian sectors (81% of total disbursements) to the 20 largest humanitarian 
recipient countries between 2014 and 2023 (ALNAP, 2025). 
The significant role of the World Bank Group as the largest MDB provider of humanitarian financing 
and total ODA to humanitarian crisis countries places an even greater weight on the focus of the World 
Bank’s highly anticipated update to its Strategy for Fragility, Conflict and Violence. The evaluation of the 
last edition of this strategy covering 2020–2025 found that while it enabled the World Bank to maintain 
its presence in countries experiencing ongoing conflict or crisis, and strengthened its partnerships 
with UN agencies, it lacked a theory of change and clear implementation plan and did not elaborate on 
engagement objectives relating to subnational conflict or forced displacement (World Bank, 2025).
One potentially limiting factor for the World Bank’s role in advancing the localisation of crisis finance 
is its reliance on UN agencies as third-party implementers (TPIs), if engaging with or through the 
government is not possible in conflict- or crisis-affected countries. The World Bank’s Operational Policy 
7.30 allows it to pause its direct engagement with governments after an irregular transfer of power 
in a borrower country and enables it to adapt by instead channelling funds through TPIs to countries 
affected by conflict. Between the fiscal years 2015 and 2024, TPIs were used for a fifth of World Bank 
projects in fragile and conflict-affected situations, representing around a tenth of total commitments 
($10.3 billion) in those contexts (World Bank, 2025). TPI activity was particularly concentrated in 
Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen. Funding contracts with UN agencies accounted for more than 
95% of TPI funding (ibid.). Problematically, there is currently no established practice for TPI selection 
and contracting arrangements at the World Bank, meaning country teams often select partners and 
negotiate costs on an ad hoc basis. The costs in those TPI contracts are not transparent and were not 
even shared with the independent evaluation team investigating the World Bank’s Strategy for Fragility, 
Conflict and Violence, though the evaluation points to anecdotal evidence that UN overhead costs vary 
widely and can be as high as 40% (ibid.).
Governments facing humanitarian crises at home might also struggle to take on the fiscal debt required 
to access most financing from MDBs. The majority of crisis financing by MDBs is in the form of loans 
that are often not concessional enough to count as ODA (Figure 17). The small share of grant funding of 
around 15% of MDBs’ humanitarian financing between 2020 and 2024 prevents governments with high
56
HPG report
levels of sovereign debt from accessing these funds. This is problematic for governments in countries 
affected by protracted humanitarian crises, which between 2015 and 2024 saw their average debt 
repayments as a share of government revenue double to 11.5% (ALNAP, 2025). This matches similar 
findings with regards to the limited accessibility of pre-arranged crisis financing to governments in so-
called low-income countries or fragile and conflict-affected situations (Plichta et al., 2025).
13
Figure 17  Humanitarian financing disbursements from multilateral development banks by degree of 
concessionality, 2020–2024
2.8
0.3
0.8
1.7
1.3
0.5
0.6
0.2
3.5
2.1
1.0
0.4
4.2
2.2
1.4
0.6
4.8
2.3
1.5
0.9
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Humanitarian ﬁnancing disbursement (US$ billions)
ODA grants ODA loans Other official ﬂows
Source: OECD DAC Creditor Reporting System.
Notes: The analysis covered 12 MDBs, of which six (African Development Fund, Council of Europe Development 
Bank, Inter-American Development Bank, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International 
Development Association and the Islamic Development Bank) reported financing under humanitarian sector codes to 
the OECD DAC and are included in this graph. Funding data is in constant 2023 prices.
13 P re-arranged financing is defined by the Centre for Disaster Protection as financing that is approved in advance 
of a crisis and guaranteed to be released to a specific implementer when a pre-identified trigger condition is 
met (Plichta et al., 2025).
57
HPG report
4.3 Non-mainstream donors and local and national actor funding 
Non-mainstream donors − defined here as governments that are not members of the OECD DAC – 
also fund LNAs. However, the extent to which these donors ‘localise’ funding varies greatly, as does the 
channel of delivery of funding.
Of the five non-mainstream donors analysed, Saudi Arabia provides the most funding to LNAs as a 
percentage of its total (69%), followed by Türkiye (25%), Kuwait (24%), the UAE (18%), and Qatar 
(1%) – see Figure 18. The wide variety of localisation practices across non-mainstream donors reflects 
a range of practices in who they fund, and where they fund. Both Saudi Arabia and the UAE follow a 
similar practice of giving large amounts of their LNA funding bilaterally to a small number of other 
governments. This practice contrasts with those of Türkiye and Kuwait.
Figure 18 Percentage of humanitarian funding in 2024 to LNAs from non-mainstream donors
69%
25%
24%
18%
1%
0.2%
0 25 50 75 100
Saudi Arabia
Türkiye
Kuwait
United Arab Emirates
Qatar
All other non-mainstream
government donors
Vast majority of funding to local 
and national actors (77%) is
funding to the government of Yemen 
94% of Türkiye's funding to local
and national actors goes to
three Red Crescent societies  
Most of Kuwait's local and national
actor funding (74%) goes to 21
Red Cross/Red Crescent societies 
99% of the UAE's funding to local
and national actors goes
bilaterally to other governments  
Only $4m to local and national 
actors via two funding ﬂows
Less than $2m can be identiﬁed 
using FTS – the majority of other
government funding is for domestic 
response  
Proportion of humanitarian funding 
going to local and national actors (%)
Source: HPG based on OCHA’s Financial Tracking Service (FTS)
Notes: The dataset used for this analysis is based on FTS only, as opposed to the dataset used in Chapter 1 that 
includes other sources, such as data on RCRC National Societies. Using an FTS-only dataset for this analysis allows 
a more comprehensive view of disaggregated data as FTS details individual funding flows, whilst incorporating the 
dataset on RCRC National Societies from the IFRC Network Databank would allow only aggregate views and thus not 
allow the source of funding to be visible, which in this analysis is particularly important.
58
HPG report
On the surface, the case of Saudi Arabia appears to be a positive one and presents a potential opportunity 
for LNAs. However, 77% of its funding to LNAs is made up of bilateral flows to the government of Yemen, 
with a further 6% consisting of other bilateral funding. These bilateral flows totalled $705 million in 2024 
(or 83% of Saudi Arabia’s LNA funding). National NGOs in at least 20 countries received $118 million from 
the government of Saudi Arabia in 2024, equivalent to 14% of its LNA total.
The UAE also gives bilaterally to other governments. Around 99% of the UAE’s funding to LNAs in 
2024 ($219 million of $220 million) went bilaterally to other governments. The government of Lebanon 
received 58% of the UAE’s LNA total, followed by the governments of Chad (18%) and Ukraine (9%). 
However, in total, the majority of the UAE’s funding flows were allocated internally (for example to 
the Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum Humanitarian and Charity Establishment, or UAE Aid), which 
consisted of 50% of identified flows in FTS, followed by the UN which received 26% of identified 
funding.
Both Türkiye and Kuwait give a similar amount of their identified funding to LNAs, with the vast majority 
going to RCRC National Societies. For Türkiye, $93 million of the $107 million (86%) going to LNAs went 
to the Egyptian Red Crescent Society for its Palestine response, with another $8 million going to the 
Sudanese Red Crescent Society and Afghan Red Crescent Society.14 For Kuwait, 74% of its funding to LNAs 
went to 21 RCRC National Societies, totalling $10 million, with another 25% going to NGOs ($3 million).
Funding from the government of Qatar is largely not localised, with only two funding flows identified in 
FTS going to LNAs. The majority of Qatar’s funding goes to multilaterals and UN agencies (such as the 
Global Fund, the UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) or the 
UN Development Programme).
These two main delivery channels of LNA funding from non-mainstream donors (bilaterally to 
governments and via the RCRC National Societies) present a challenge for local and national NGOs. 
Whilst the vast majority of funding to NGOs from non-mainstream donors comes from Saudi Arabia, 
the total across these five countries to local and national NGOs is only $122 million in 2024 (which 
compares to $3.3 billion in total funding from these donors in 2024).
Poor data availability presents a particular challenge when examining data from other government 
donors. Across the other 69 government donors found in FTS, the overwhelming majority of funding 
goes directly to UN agencies ($670 million), followed by other international actors ($18 million), and 
then LNAs ($1.6 million). This funding largely reflects government allocations to domestic response in 
their own countries. 
14 Using strict definitions, the Egyptian Red Crescent Society is an LNA in Egypt; operating in other countries 
would exclude it from being defined as an LNA for those funding flows. However, given the complexities around 
cross-border operations into Gaza in 2024 and the aid going through Egypt into Gaza, the benefit of the doubt 
was given to include the Egyptian Red Crescent Society as an LNA when working on the Palestine response in 
2024.
59
HPG report
4.4 Red Cross and Red Crescent National Societies and localisation 
RCRC National Societies are key LNAs in the contexts in which they operate. This analysis aims to 
illuminate how RCRC National Societies receive external funding (i.e. funding from abroad).15 For ease of 
reference and comparability with the rest of the report, the following analysis focuses only on contexts 
with international humanitarian responses.16 
National Societies in emergency contexts have received an average of 48% of funding from external 
sources over the last five years.17 This ranges from 28% sourced externally in 2023, to 60% sourced 
externally in 2024. In absolute terms, this has ranged between $139 million in 2020 to $476 million in 
2023. Whilst the percentage of funding from external sources fluctuates, funding from abroad forms a 
large portion of National Societies’ overall income in emergency contexts. 
Figure 19 shows, for the most recent year of available data, how much income RCRC National Societies 
in emergency contexts receive from abroad. The majority of National Societies in emergency contexts 
(23 out of 32) receive at least 50% of their income from external sources, whilst the average National 
Society in this group receives 70% of its income from external sources. This ranges from protracted 
crisis contexts such as Yemen, Chad, Mali, Syria and Somalia – which all receive at least 90% of their 
funding from external sources – to ‘middle-income’ countries, which tend to have a lower percentage of 
their income from abroad (such as Ukraine (43%), Guatemala (38%), and Colombia (24%)). 
This raises two competing points. On the one hand, it illustrates that National Societies in emergency 
contexts have the experience and capacity to ‘localise’ large amounts of external funding in comparison 
to their overall income. On the other hand, many National Societies are dependent on external funding 
for the vast majority of their income. This reflects a wider tension, between the desire to ‘localise’ 
international funding on the one hand, and the risks of overdependency on external sources on the 
other, which may make them vulnerable to external shocks.
15 Funding from abroad is defined as funding from: foreign governments, UN agencies, pooled funds, other 
National Societies, the IFRC and the ICRC. Funding solely from domestic sources is more difficult to draw a 
clear boundary around, as other categories, such as individuals, corporations, foundations and NGOs, are not 
necessarily wholly domestic or international. Regarding funding from abroad, it is therefore assumed that the 
categories outlined are wholly international.
16 Emergency contexts are defined as countries with an interagency appeal (e.g. HRP, Flash Appeals, but not 
Refugee Response Plans). Whilst it is recognised that the UN-led system is separate, this allows a common 
frame of reference across analyses.
17 External sources are defined as funding from other RCRC sources (other National Societies, ICRC, IFRC), as 
well as the UN, pooled funds, and foreign governments. Whilst other sources of funding (such as individuals, 
corporations, foundations) may well be external, this is not disaggregated in the data. Therefore, the 
percentages shown here should be considered lower-bound estimates of external resourcing for National 
Societies.
60
HPG report
Figure 19 Percentage of income to RCRC National Societies coming from abroad
100
99
97
97
96
94
93
91
90
90
82
80
79
76
75
71
69
68
65
64
62
60
56
43
42
38
37
34
31
24
23
17
0 25 50 75 100
Yemen
Chad (2023)
Mali (2023)
Zambia
Syrian Arab Republic
Somalia
Central African Republic (2018)
South Sudan (2023)
Haiti (2021)
Myanmar (2023)
Malawi
Madagascar
Mozambique (2023)
Lebanon (2023)
Mongolia
Palestine, State of
Burundi
Pakistan (2023)
Libya (2021)
DRC
Ethiopia (2023)
Nigeria (2023)
El Salvador
Ukraine (2022)
Nepal
Guatemala (2023)
Zimbabwe
Honduras (2023)
Indonesia (2018)
Colombia
Afghanistan
Sudan (2023)
Average – 70%
Proportion of income (%)
Source: HPG based on the IFRC Societies Network Databank.
Notes: External sources include income from foreign governments, the UN, pooled funds, other RCRC National Societies, 
the IFRC, and the ICRC. National Societies shown include those from countries where there are interagency appeals. 
Whilst it is recognised that the UN-led system is separate, this allows a common frame of reference across analyses. 
Where data was not available for 2024, the most recent year of data is shown and noted in brackets on the axis.
61
HPG report
It should be noted, however, that data quality varies within the IFRC Network Databank. Some RCRC 
National Societies were excluded from the analyses as the aggregate and disaggregated totals did not 
match. Furthermore, for analysis in Chapter 1, it was found that significant amounts of funding to some 
National Societies was found on FTS that is not included in the IFRC Network Databank.
A closer look at the sources of external funding shows how external funding is intimately connected 
with the wider International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement (Figure 20).
Figure 20 Sources of income from abroad to National Societies in emergency contexts
42%
50% 51%
32%
52% 57%
48%
21%
11% 16%
18%
22% 12% 30%
20% 23% 15%
14%
15%
10%
13%8% 9% 9%
12%
6%
13%
7%10% 7% 5%
21%
4% 8%
1%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Proportion of income from abroad (%)
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
National Societies IFRC ICRC
UN Foreign governments Pooled funds
Source: HPG based on the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies Network Databank.
Notes: External sources include income from foreign governments, the UN, pooled funds, other RCRC National 
Societies, the IFRC, and the ICRC. Emergency contexts are defined as countries where there are interagency appeals. 
Whilst it is recognised that the UN-led system is separate, this allows a common frame of reference across analyses.
Figure 20 shows that most external resources come from one of three sources: other National 
Societies (which may be those in traditional donor countries), the IFRC, and the ICRC. In 2024, 92% of 
external resources for National Societies in emergency contexts came from inside the International 
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement (48% from RCRC National Societies, 30% from IFRC, and 13% 
from ICRC). This is similar to most other years across the period shown (excluding 2021), and external
62
HPG report
funding from the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement fluctuated between 79% to 
91% of external income. Funding from other external sources, such as the UN, foreign governments, or 
pooled funds, tended to constitute a small percentage of the overall income to these National Societies.
This paints a picture of a funding system that is quite distinct and separate to the rest of the 
humanitarian system. Whilst the funding source may in part be the same (e.g. OECD DAC donors 
providing funding to domestic National Societies that pass it on), National Societies in emergency 
contexts are intimately connected with the broader parts of the International Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Movement, and not as directly with the broader international aid system.
4.5 Gaps in our knowledge – INGOs, private sources, and domestic 
resource mobilisation
As noted in Chapter 1, the improvements in quantifying and identifying funding to LNAs come 
primarily from improved reporting from UN agencies since 2022. And whilst the UN is responsible for 
programming a large volume of overall international humanitarian assistance, there are other actors for 
whom less is known about funding flows. 
4.5.1 INGO funding to LNAs
INGOs are a significant part of the humanitarian ecosystem, receiving $5.1 billion from public donors 
(governments and EU institutions) in 2024 and representing 18% of public donor funding (ALNAP, 
2025). Within the funding ecosystem, INGOs play a critical role as intermediaries by partnering with 
LNAs, as many government donors do not ‘have the capability to administer direct contracts with 
[LNAs]’ (Grand Bargain Subgroup on Intermediaries, 2025). Despite this critical role, it is still not clear 
how much funding is passed on by INGOs to LNAs.
INGOs themselves report how much funding they give to LNAs as part of the Grand Bargain self-
reporting process. In 2024, 17 INGOs reported to the Grand Bargain that they had funded LNAs, 
totalling $796 million. However, these are aggregate global figures, and the same organisations rarely 
report disaggregated financial flows to public reporting platforms such as OCHA’s FTS or IATI.
Table 2 shows INGOs that reported to the Grand Bargain giving $20 million or more to LNAs in 2024. 
These organisations reported giving a total of $717 million to LNAs. However, only $14 million of financial 
flows provided by those INGOs to LNAs can be found on FTS, whilst only $24 million can be found on 
IATI, representing 2% and 3% respectively of what the same organisations reported to the Grand Bargain. 
The primary issue is that of reporting by the INGOs themselves. Of the $14 million found on FTS, all 
funding flows were reported not by the INGOs themselves, but by LNAs receiving the funding. Of 
the funding found on IATI, data is incomplete and there are large inconsistencies between reporters 
(and organisations of the same federations) in how they report transactions, leading to difficulty in 
identifying humanitarian funding flows to LNAs from INGOs.
63
HPG report
Table 2 INGO funding in 2024 to LNAs by reporting mechanism
Organisation
Grand Bargain self-reports FTS IATI
Volume Share of income Volume Volume
International Rescue Committee $146 million 15% $2.5 million $2.7 million 
CARE $136.3 million 26% $5. 1 million $3.6 million 
Catholic Relief Services $88.7 million 15% − −
World Vision $80.8 million 7% $1.6 million −
Save the Children $71.0 million 11.5% $3.9 million −
Oxfam $44.9 million 26% $0.4 million $15.0 million 
Norwegian Refugee Council $39.2 million 6% $0. 1 million $1.9 million 
Islamic Relief $33.3 million 19% − −
Danish Refugee Council $29.3 million 6% − $1 million 
Danish Church Aid $25.7 million 25% − −
Christian Aid $21.4 million 78% − *
Total $716.6 million $13.6 million $24.3 million 
Source: Grand Bargain self-reports, OCHA FTS, IATI
Note: All financial flows have been converted to USD using OECD DAC exchange rates for 2024. IATI flows 
include all publishers of the same grouped organisation (e.g. Oxfam includes Oxfam GB, Oxfam America, 
Oxfam Novib, etc.) and filters for transactions with a specific humanitarian flag. *Christian Aid data does not 
flag humanitarian transactions specifically – including all transactions for Christian Aid would equal $9.4 million. 
Table shows organisations that declare over $20 million provided to LNAs as per Grand Bargain self-reports. 
Percentage of income self-reported to the Grand Bargain.
INGOs lag behind the UN in public reporting on financial flows to LNAs. The disaggregation of financial 
flows by UN agencies in partner information allows for data to be independently verified and thus gives 
a more comprehensive view of how much funding goes to LNAs, by recipient organisation and country. 
In Chapter 1 it is noted that 9.5% of all humanitarian funding goes to LNAs according to available data – 
if this were to include the funding that is not independently verifiable from INGOs but reported to the 
Grand Bargain, this percentage would rise to 12.1%.
This underscores the need for INGOs to make better use of the publicly available platforms that exist 
for reporting financial flows to LNAs, notably FTS and IATI. Even without using these platforms, UN 
agencies provide an example of publishing data in their own formats (whether tables or dashboards), 
which, if followed by INGOs, would also allow a better understanding of flows to LNAs.
64
HPG report
4.5.2 Private sources of funding
International private funding for humanitarian response constitutes a significant source of funding for 
the sector – around $7 billion in humanitarian funding (around 17–18% of the total sector in recent years) 
(ALNAP, 2025). Despite its significant role in funding humanitarian response, there is little data available 
regarding its role in funding LNAs. In 2024, only $16 million can be found on FTS going to at least eight 
LNAs globally. This compares to $483 million going to non-local actors. 
This raises several issues. First, the combined amount ($500 million) is far short of the $7 billion noted 
by ALNAP. Thus, there is underreporting of private funding across the board, not just funding going to 
LNAs. This is in part because private donors are not reporting contributions to FTS. For example, all 
recorded funding from the Gates, Hilton, LEGO and Mastercard foundations, as well as that from the 
GAVI Alliance and Global Fund, is attributed to international actors on FTS, as it is the partners that are 
reporting these contributions, not the private donors themselves.18 
Second, the $16 million found on FTS is certainly an underestimate of private funding to LNAs. For 
example, an HPG report on financing refugee leadership found $25.4 million from private donors going 
to RLOs alone in 2024 (Sturridge et al., 2025). This includes funding from the Hilton, Mastercard and 
Vitol foundations, amongst others, who are not recorded on FTS as having provided any funding to 
LNAs. It could be argued that the figure going to RLOs is not always strictly ‘humanitarian’ funding 
and so this is not a like-for-like comparison. Nevertheless, it provides a useful comparison point, 
and thus the real figure is likely to be a lot higher. The State of disaster philanthropy report is also 
another useful comparison point. The report highlights $29.7 million in philanthropic giving to non-US 
recipient organisations (CDP, 2025), again higher than the amount found on FTS (and just restricted to 
philanthropic giving).
One simple step forward would be for key private funders, namely a range of large philanthropies and 
foundations, to report funding to FTS or IATI. In addition to the lack of reporting on FTS, many private 
foundations also do not report to IATI.
This report does not analyse other sources of private funding, such as funding from diaspora or 
remittances. This is not to diminish the role of these funding flows – indeed, remittances have 
historically outstripped humanitarian aid in terms of resource flows and can be a vital source of income 
for short-term consumption in response to a shock (Bryant, 2019). However, they are a fundamentally 
different type of external resourcing and thus outside the scope of this paper.
18 According to the GAVI website, the vaccine alliance is a ‘public–private’ partnership. The Global Fund to Fight 
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria has been consistently coded as an ‘international NGO’ since 2023, although 
the Global Fund’s website identifies the organisation as a multilateral funder. Thus, whilst both are classified as 
private organisations on FTS, this may not necessarily accurately reflect the nature of the organisations.
65
HPG report
4.5.3 Domestic government funding
Another gap in understanding who funds humanitarian response is money that comes from domestic 
governments. The 2019 Global humanitarian assistance report notes that in countries with recurrent 
humanitarian appeals, government revenue totalled $272 per person, compared to $16 per person in 
international humanitarian funding (DI, 2019). Whilst the former includes all government revenue and 
not necessarily domestic allocations for crisis response, it is indicative that often governments have 
resources in the same contexts that have recurrent humanitarian appeals. 
However, the extent of domestic allocations to humanitarian response is not consistently reported. This 
may be due to the fact that, according to the FTS criteria for inclusion of funding data, FTS is to include 
‘only aid that is provided internationally. For example, government domestic spending on refugees 
within its borders will be excluded’ (OCHA, 2017). 
Furthermore, domestic allocations to humanitarian response also raise definitional issues. Whilst 
support by disaster management agencies can be more clearly considered ‘humanitarian’, other forms of 
assistance such as shock-responsive social protection may be less readily understood as ‘humanitarian’.
Prior to 2020, total funding from domestic governments on FTS rarely reached above $100 million. In 
2024, this had risen to $591 million. The majority of this came from five domestic government donors 
(80%). The same holds broadly true for 2023 (69%).
There has been some increase in recent years in the reporting of domestic funding. In 2019, only 
one government was found to spend more than $10 million on domestic response. By 2024, this 
had increased to 12 governments. Despite this, the dynamic mirrors that related to private funding: 
international aid agencies may report funding, whilst the source of the funding does not – domestic 
governments in this instance. In 2024, only the government of Somalia reported funding directly to FTS, 
whilst all other government funding was reported by an aid agency.
This is not necessarily an issue. Funding flows from the government of Somalia are to UN agencies 
(such as the Food and Agriculture Organization, IOM and WFP) for activities within the HRP, which 
is both within the scope of FTS reporting and represents a distinct case – funding flows from 
governments to UN agencies (likely from international sources in the first instance) is different from 
governments both domestically raising and spending such funding.
Furthermore, domestic flows from an LNA (such as a government or an NGO) to another LNA are 
extremely limited in FTS. In 2024, only three partnerships can be found globally between LNAs in the 
same country, totalling less than $1 million.
The paucity of data raises a broader question: what is the role of domestic governments and 
international agencies with regard to reporting data on domestic allocations? It is not incumbent
66
HPG report
on domestic governments to report their activities to systems such as FTS (as FTS guidance notes 
these activities are beyond its scope), although there is a broader argument around transparency on 
government allocations and accountability to their own populations.
However, one responsibility of international agencies that coordinate responses, such as OCHA and 
UNHCR, is to understand the role of the international system vis-à-vis domestic governments, as 
well as to coordinate with governments. One avenue of further inquiry would be to explore whether 
coordinating agencies could collect and publish data on domestic allocations in order to better inform 
the role of international humanitarian response, at the same time as not placing undue burden on 
domestic governments.
It is also the case that in some contexts, the lack of information on authorities providing assistance is 
also a function of the fact that governments or authorities may be parties to the conflict, and thus the 
dynamic in providing assistance or collaborating with humanitarian responders is inherently different 
to, for example, a government responding to a natural disaster.
Recommendation: INGOs and NGO-led funds should improve public 
reporting on their contributions to localising humanitarian funding
INGOs and NGO-led funds are important drivers of more locally led humanitarian responses. 
Some of them present radical shifts in international humanitarian assistance by pivoting from 
the direct delivery of programmes towards solely relying on equitable partnerships with LNAs 
as implementers, as in the case of Christian Aid (Christian Aid, 2025). However, despite ongoing 
efforts by ICVA and others to improve this, there is a lack of visibility on the quantity and quality of 
funding they are providing to LNAs. We therefore recommend:
INGOs and NGO-led funds should comprehensively publish timely and accessible data on 
the quantity and quality of funding they provide to LNAs.
Like our recommendation on the transparency of UN agencies, this public data should be in 
machine-readable formats (e.g. CSV files), as close to real time as possible, and interoperable 
through the inclusion of a minimum set of standardised fields (including USD amount, year, 
country, recipient organisation name and recipient organisation type, which matches Grand 
Bargain definitions). Such standardised fields would also make it more feasible to publish this data 
to public reporting platforms such as the IATI Standard and OCHA’s FTS.
Improved visibility of funding to LNAs by INGOs and NGO-led funds, in particular locally led ones, 
would also help government and private donor institutions with how to best support local and 
national civil society in ways that are complementary to the large amounts of funding channelled 
through the UN system.
67
HPG report
Recommendation: Conduct further research on how international 
funding fits with wider crisis financing
Our report primarily focuses on the analysis of international humanitarian funding to LNAs. This 
chapter points to other funding sources relevant to those actors (e.g. domestic governments, 
MDBs and diaspora), and further research is needed on their relative significance for LNAs in 
assisting crisis-affected populations. We therefore recommend: 
International humanitarian actors need to more systematically identify which resource flows 
and institutions already support locally led responses in crisis contexts and enable those. 
Otherwise, the localisation of international funding may reflect another form of globalisation by 
forcing international ways of operating (e.g. the cluster system, due diligence protocols, and the 
separation of humanitarian and development assistance) on a diverse set of contexts and actors.
68
HPG report
Conclusion
Despite the newly analysed funding data in this report from four UN agencies and the IFRC Network, 
the share of international humanitarian funding reaching LNAs of less than 10% in 2024 still falls 
significantly short of the 25% localisation commitment. The newly available UN partner data could 
help identify in what contexts each agency is struggling to localise its funding and response, deserving 
further scrutiny on how to remove those context- or agency-specific barriers. However, the timelines 
and accessibility of UN partner data need to improve to enable this. INGOs need to also follow suit in 
improving the transparency of funding they provide to LNAs. LNAs and donors could then draw on 
this data to hold intermediaries that fail to localise funding to account and to reward and acknowledge 
those that succeed.
Our findings can help refocus current debates on how to make overdue progress on localising 
humanitarian funding based on the most recent data available. UN agencies, partly owing to the 
vast amounts of resources they receive, were the largest providers of funding to LNAs and deserve 
proportional scrutiny of their role in supporting more locally led crisis responses. Many CBPFs likely 
need to diversify their set of local and national partners to be able to scale up funding to them. And 
government donors holding the purse strings could yet do more to hold the intermediaries, on whom 
they rely to pass their funding on to LNAs, to account.
The contribution of newer funding mechanisms to progress localisation commitments, such as INGO-
led funds or locally led solutions, is not yet visible in the data. It is therefore too early to see how much 
they will be able to shift the funding needle towards the 25% target, though donors and LNAs might 
want to bet on those newer mechanisms in favour of the traditional funding channels that have failed 
to localise sufficiently over the course of the last decade. 
The need for more timely and accessible public data on humanitarian funding to LNAs is especially 
relevant given the funding cuts. As shown in our preliminary analysis of 2025 data, there is a risk that 
shrinking government donor funds will lead UN agencies and INGOs to consolidate what funding 
remains for their own staff and programmes, disproportionately cutting down on their partnerships 
with LNAs. Better data is urgently needed to identify and mitigate the risk of this possible retreat from 
localisation commitments.
69
HPG report
References
ALNAP – Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance (2025) Global 
humanitarian assistance report 2025. London: ALNAP/ODI Global (https://alnap.org/help-library/
resources/global-humanitarian-assistance-gha-report-2025-e-report/ ).
AP – Associated Press (2026) ‘The US and UN launch a humanitarian fund with $700 million for war-
ravaged Sudan’. The Associated Press, 4 February (https://apnews.com/article/sudan-us-uae-war-
un-2a0ea03546391969 bffd3ad845a6ee3f).
Barbelet, V., Davies, G., Flint, J. and Davey, E. (2021) Interrogating the evidence base 
on humanitarian localisation: a literature study. HPG literature review. London: ODI (https://odi.org/
en/publications/interrogating-the-evidence-base-on-humanitarian-localisation-a-literature-study/).
Barter, D. and Sumlut, G. (2023) ‘The “conflict paradox”: humanitarian access, localisation, and (dis) 
empowerment in Myanmar, Somalia and Somaliland’ Disasters 47(4): 849–869  
(https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/disa.12573).
Bryant, J. (2019) Remittances in humanitarian crises. HPG report. London: ODI (https://odi.org/en/
publications/remittances-in-humanitarian-crises/ ).
CDP – Centre for Disaster Philanthropy (2025) State of disaster philanthropy 2025. 
Washington DC: CDP (https://disasterphilanthropy.org/state-of-disaster-philanthropy-2025/ ).
Christian Aid (2025) Stepping into the future: transforming Christian Aid to shift power to partners 
and communities. Webpage (www.christianaid.org.uk/news/about-us/transforming-christian-aid-
shift-power-partners-and-communities).
Concern Worldwide (2024) Beyond barriers: final study report. Dublin: Concern Worldwide  
(www.concern.net/press-releases/new-research-identifies-key-barriers-preventing-progress-
localising-humanitarian).
DI – Development Initiatives (2019) Global humanitarian assistance report 2019. Bristol: 
Development Initiatives (https://reliefweb.int/report/world/global-humanitarian-assistance-
report-2019).
DI and NRC – Norwegian Refugee Council (2019) Field perspectives on multi-year humanitarian 
funding and planning: how theory has translated into practice in Jordan and Lebanon. Bristol: 
Development Initiatives (https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/grand-bargain-official-
website/field-perspectives-multi-year-humanitarian-funding-and-planning-how-theory-has-
translated-practice).
DI, in partnership with UNICEF and Oxfam (2022) Overhead cost allocation in the humanitarian 
sector. Geneva: IASC (https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/humanitarian-financing/iasc-
guidance-provision-overheads-local-and-national-partners).
Els, C. (2019) Country-based pooled funds: the NGO perspective. Oslo and Geneva: NRC and OCHA 
(www.nrc.no/resources/reports/country-based-pooled-funds-the-ngo-perspective).
70
HPG report
Gawel, A. (2026) ‘Devex Newswire: Trump signals no letup in cuts to US foreign assistance’. Devex, 
6 April (www.devex.com/news/devex-newswire-trump-signals-no-letup-in-cuts-to-us-foreign-
assistance-112219).
Grand Bargain (2016) ‘The Grand Bargain: a shared commitment to better serve people in need’. 
Geneva: IASC (https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/grand-bargain/grand-bargain-shared-
commitment-better-serve-people-need-2016).
Grand Bargain (2020) ‘Quality funding: how to reach critical mass’. Geneva: IASC  
(https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/grand-bargain-official-website/quality-funding-how-
reach-critical-mass-june-2020).
Grand Bargain (2022) ‘Grand Bargain Caucus on Quality Funding: outcome document’. Geneva: IASC 
(https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/grand-bargain-official-website/grand-bargain-quality-
funding-caucus-concludes-new-funding-commitments).
Grand Bargain (2026) ‘Endorsers of the Grand Bargain caucus outcomes (continuously updated)’. 
Webpage (https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/grand-bargain-official-website/endorsers-
grand-bargain-caucus-outcomes-continously-updated).
Grand Bargain and DI (2023) ‘Caucus on funding for localisation – Collective monitoring and 
accountability framework’. Geneva: IASC (https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/grand-
bargain-official-website/caucus-funding-localisation-collective-monitoring-and-accountability-
framework).
Grand Bargain Subgroup on Intermediaries (2025) ‘Kick-Off Meeting Summary – 25 June 2025’. 
Geneva: IASC (https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/sites/default/files/2025-07/GB%20
Subgroup%20Intermediaries%20KickOff%20Meeting%20Summary%20June%2025.pdf).
Grand Bargain Secretariat (2025) ‘Grand Bargain Self-Reporting 2025’. Webpage  
(https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/sites/default/files/2025-09/OCHA%20-%20Grand%20
Bargain%20Self%20Reporting%202025%20-%20ActivityInfo.pdf).
Hassanien, N. and Pearson, M. (2026) How underfunding local organisations’ overheads 
undermines humanitarian action. HPG report. London: ODI Global (https://odi.org/en/
publications/how-underfunding-local-organisations-overheads-undermines-humanitarian-
action/ ).
IASC – Inter-Agency Standing Committee (2016) ‘The Grand Bargain: a shared commitment to 
better serve people in need’. Geneva: IASC (https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/grand-
bargain/grand-bargain-shared-commitment-better-serve-people-need-2016).
IASC (2018) ‘Definitions paper: IASC Humanitarian Financing Task Team, Localisation Marker 
Working Group’. Geneva: IASC (https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/humanitarian-
financing-task-team/documents-public/hftt-localisation-marker-definitions-paper-24).
IASC (2022) ‘IASC guidance on the provision of overheads to local and national partners’ Geneva: 
IASC (https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/humanitarian-financing/iasc-guidance-provision-
overheads-local-and-national-partners).
IASC (2025) ‘Statement by Emergency Relief Coordinator Tom Fletcher – the humanitarian reset phase 
two’. Geneva: IASC (https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/inter-agency-standing-committee/
statement-emergency-relief-coordinator-tom-fletcher-humanitarian-reset-phase-two).
71
HPG report
IASC (2026) ‘Humanitarian reset: frequently asked questions’. Geneva: IASC  
(https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/inter-agency-standing-committee/humanitarian-
reset-frequently-asked-questions).
ICVA (2023) Pooled funding at a crossroads: a comprehensive review and analysis. Geneva: ICVA 
(www.icvanetwork.org/topics/5532 /news/10082058).
ICVA (2024) NGO perspectives on pooled funds. Geneva: ICVA (https://reliefweb.int/report/world/
icva-ngo-perspectives-pooled-funds-november-2024).
ICVA (2025a) ‘Mapping NGO-led pooled funds’. Geneva: ICVA (https://web.archive.org/
web/20251111084816/https://www.icvanetwork.org/resource/mapping-ngo-led-pooled-funds/ ).
ICVA (2025b) Publish once, use often: realising the promise of data in humanitarian work. Geneva: 
ICVA (www.icvanetwork.org/topics/5532 /news/10081687).
Kiros, H. (2026) ‘The Trump administration is ending aid that it says saves lives’. The Atlantic, 22 
February (www.theatlantic.com/health/2026/02/trump-state-department-ending-aid-seven-
african-countries/686106/ ).
Loy, I. (2026a) ‘Inklings | Save the Children and the elephant in the pool’. The New Humanitarian,  
1 April (www.thenewhumanitarian.org/newsletter/2026/04/01/inklings-save-children-and-
elephant-pool).
Loy, I. (2026b) ‘Inklings | HNPW and the politics of pooled funds’. The New Humanitarian, 16 March 
(www.thenewhumanitarian.org/newsletter/2026/03/16/inklings-hnpw-and-politics-pooled-funds).
Noe, N. (2025) Accelerating localization: a roadmap for the Sudan humanitarian fund. 
Washington DC: Refugees International (www.refugeesinternational.org/reports-briefs/
accelerating-localization-a-roadmap-for-the-sudan-humanitarian-fund/ ). 
NRC – Norwegian Refugee Council (2022) Pooled funds: the new humanitarian silver bullet? Oslo: 
NRC (www.nrc.no/resources/reports/pooled-funds-the-new-humanitarian-silver-bullet).
NRC and DI (2024) Catalogue of quality funding practices to the humanitarian response: 2nd edition. 
Oslo: NRC (https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/grand-bargain-official-website/nrc-
catalogue-quality-funding-practices-humanitarian-response-2nd-edition).
OCHA – Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (2017) ‘Financial Tracking Service: 
criteria for inclusion of reported humanitarian funding (Annex I, updated)’. Geneva: OCHA 
(https://fts.unocha.org/sites/default/files/2020-10/26.01.17_-_criteria_for_inclusion_-_2017_
updated_annex_i.pdf).
OCHA (2023) ‘Country-based pooled funds global guidelines’. Geneva: OCHA (www.unocha.org/
publications/report/world/country-based-pooled-funds-global-guidelines-enaresfr).
OCHA (2025a) ‘OCHA-managed humanitarian funds receive landmark $2 billion contribution from 
United States’. Press release, 29 December (www.unocha.org/news/ocha-managed-humanitarian-
funds-receive-landmark-us2-billion-contribution-united-states).
OCHA (2025b) ‘Humanitarian reset (10 March 2025)’. Press release, 10 March (www.unocha.org/
news/humanitarian-reset-10-march-2025).
OCHA (2025c) CERF annual results report 2024. Geneva: OCHA (www.unocha.org/publications/
report/world/cerf-annual-results-report-2024).
OCHA (2025d) ‘Humanitarian landscape and reset (15 May 2025)’. Press release, 15 May  
(www.unocha.org/news/humanitarian-landscape-and-reset-15-may-2025).
72
HPG report
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2026) ‘OECD data 
explorer’. Webpage/dataset (https://data-explorer.oecd.org/ ).
Oxfam (2018) Money talks: a synthesis report assessing humanitarian funding flows to local actors 
in Bangladesh and Uganda. Oxford: Oxfam ( https://policy-practice.oxfam.org/resources/money-
talks-a-synthesis-report-assessing-humanitarian-funding-flows-to-local-ac-620447/ ).
Plichta, M., Scott, Z. and Nagaria, D. (2025) The state of pre-arranged financing for disasters 
2025. London: Centre for Disaster Protection (www.disasterprotection.org/publications-centre/
pafreport25).
Publish What You Fund (2024) ‘2024 Aid Transparency Index’. Dataset (www.publishwhatyoufund.
org/the-index/2024/ ).
Sturridge, C., Girling-Morris, F., Spencer, A., Kara, A. and Chicet, C. (2023) The failure to fund 
refugee-led organisations: why the current system is not working, and the potential for change. 
HPG report. London: ODI Global (www.odi.org/en/publications/the-failure-to-fund-refugee-
ledorganisations-why-the-current-system-is-not-working-and-the-potential-for-change).
Sturridge, C., Girling-Morris, F., Samaha, C. and Pearson, M. (2025) How to finance refugee 
leadership: navigating a humanitarian system at breaking point. HPG report. London: ODI Global 
(https://odi.org/en/publications/how-to-finance-refugee-leadership-navigating-a-humanitarian-
system-at-breaking-point/).
Sturridge, C., Daigle, M., Pearson, M. and Veerapen, N. (2026) ‘Country-based pooled funds… the 
key to unlocking localised funding, or just another blunt instrument?’ ODI Global insight, 5 March 
(https://odi.org/en/insights/country-based-pooled-funds-localisation/ ).
US Department of State (2025) ‘More lives saved for fewer taxpayer dollars: Trump Administration 
leads “humanitarian reset” in the United Nations’. Press release, 29 December (www.state.gov/
releases/under-secretary-for-foreign-assistance-humanitarian-affairs-and-religious-freedom/2025/12/
more-lives-saved-for-fewer-taxpayer-dollars-trump-administration-leads-humanitarian-resetin-the-
united-nations).
US Embassy in Egypt (2026) ‘Sudan Humanitarian Fund call to action event’. Webpage, 8 February 
(https://eg.usembassy.gov/sudan-humanitarian-fund-call-to-action-event/ ).
World Bank (2025) An evaluation of the World Bank Group strategy for fragility, conflict, and 
violence, 2020–25. Washington DC: World Bank (https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/entities/
publication/14cc73e0-a23f-4962-84c7-a86cbe8ffcad).
73
HPG report
Appendix 1   Methodology
Data sources for global funding flow dataset
Below we provide more detail on each of the data sources we combined for our analysis in Chapter 1 on 
how much international humanitarian funding is reaching LNAs.
• OCHA’s FTS data captures international humanitarian funding globally in close to real time. While 
FTS started to primarily focus on countries with HRPs coordinated by OCHA, it has expanded its 
focus for some years to capture all international funding to humanitarian responses, including to 
countries without OCHA-coordinated plans or for humanitarian activities outside those plans in 
countries where they exist. The FTS team aligned its classification of recipient organisations with 
the organisation types agreed within Grand Bargain localisation discussions. We largely rely on those 
classifications, though performed quality checks on their accuracy and changed them to align with 
our understanding of those Grand Bargain definitions where needed (e.g. by checking that national 
government agencies are only classified as national actors in their own countries). 
FTS data provides a comprehensive overview of direct humanitarian funding from government 
donors and on indirect funding through OCHA pooled funds. There are instances of indirect funding 
provided by INGOs or UN agencies reported to FTS, though not systematically. We therefore rely on 
UN partner data for agencies with that data instead, and include FTS data on indirect funding where 
no alternative, more comprehensive source is available.  
OCHA FTS data available at: https://fts.unocha.org/
• We also used UNHCR data published on the UN partner portal, which details all partners each year. 
It includes data on countries, partner names and partner types (including distinction of international 
or local/national NGO partners), project descriptions and total budgets. Data is available for 2022 to 
2024, though unfortunately only in a PDF format. In our analysis we classify all UNHCR partnerships 
as humanitarian and therefore include all their funding to partners. 
UNHCR partner data available at: https://supportcso.unpartnerportal.org/hc/en-us/
articles/13420656571671-Collaboration-with-Funded-Partners
• WFP data published on the ‘Non-governmental organizations’ page on its website. Data is available for 
2022 to 2024 and includes fields on countries, partner agencies, activity types and project descriptions, 
as well as expenditure amounts in US$. However, WFP data nominally only includes NGOs and not 
WFP’s funding through its government partners (even though we identified a small number of 
government partners within it based on publicly available information on those partners). Also, WFP 
data does not include information on whether their partners were international or LNAs, which we 
classified based on publicly available information for this report – a time-consuming task. Data is again 
in a PDF so not an accessible format. For our analysis, we also assumed that certain types of activities 
(e.g. asset creation/livelihood activities, smallholder agriculture, and social protection support) are not 
humanitarian and therefore excluded them from our dataset on humanitarian funding flows.  
WFP field-level agreement data available at: www.wfp.org/non-governmental-organizations.
74
HPG report
• CBPF allocations data was available in close to real time and with granular detail on the CBPF data 
hub. It includes classifications of local and national NGOs already; we added classifications of RCRC 
National Societies and local/national governments. The CBPFs also track sub-grants provided by CBPF 
allocation recipients to project partners. The aggregate view of those sub-grants is visible on the CBPF 
data hub; the disaggregated data was kindly shared with us by the CBPF team via e-mail. The data on 
CBPF sub-grants only includes the organisation types for the recipients of those sub-grants, including 
whether they were international or LNAs, and not their organisation names. All CBPF allocations and 
sub-grants data was included in the dataset given the funds’ humanitarian mandate. 
OCHA CBPF funding data available at: https://cbpf.data.unocha.org/
• IOM publishes data on its partnerships on a dedicated webpage, again for 2022–2024. It includes 
data on recipient country, USD value, partner name, and project titles. Caveats are that the data 
is presented in individual PowerBI dashboards, which makes extracting it a heavy lift, and it is also 
lacking partner type classifications. Again, we had to decide on what partnerships are humanitarian 
and should therefore be included in our dataset. IOM provided a Project ID typology on what 
activities are humanitarian, which we used to make this decision. IOM partner data also only includes 
awards over $30,000, so could exclude an unknown amount of funding comprising smaller grants to 
community-based groups that usually receive smaller funding contracts. 
IOM contract data available at: www.iom.int/awarded-contracts-grants-recipients-and-selected-
implementing-partners
• UNICEF data on its partnerships is published on its transparency portal. The data contains similar 
information to that of other UN agencies: country, partner name, partner type, and amount 
transferred to partners. Very helpfully, the data is accessible as a CSV file, which is more user-friendly. 
However, UNICEF’s data required the most analysis on what partnerships can be considered as 
humanitarian. We combined this partner data with project data published by UNICEF to IATI and 
matched activities on whether they were marked by the IATI humanitarian marker or were reported 
under humanitarian DAC sector codes for more than half the project value. We also searched for 
humanitarian keywords in project descriptions. Based on our analysis and spot-checking results 
for false positives, we settled on using a combination of the keyword search and DAC sector code 
reporting. The IATI humanitarian tag seemed to be applied quite liberally, which might be due to the 
possibility of assigning it to any project no matter the sector. 
UNICEF partner data available at: https://open.unicef.org/documents-and-resources?topic_id=&text_
id=implementing%20partners
• We drew on the IFRC Network Databank on funding to RCRC National Societies. This dataset 
includes large amounts of data on National Societies, including on their income, disaggregated 
by source type, in an Excel file – usefully accessible. Two issues arose with this data: one is how to 
align geographies with the rest of the humanitarian dataset given that the dataset includes National 
Societies in almost all countries globally so that it most closely aligns with what is being measured 
in FTS and the overall LNA number we use as a denominator in Chapter 1. We only included funding 
data for National Societies in countries with interagency humanitarian responses for inclusion in 
our dataset. The second issue was to define an ‘external source’ – we specifically looked at certain 
categories, such as foreign governments, UN and pooled funds, and external RCRC sources such as 
IFRC/ICRC/other National Societies. 
Red Cross funding data available at: https://data.ifrc.org/
75
HPG report
Traceability of indirect funding
Grand Bargain signatories agreed to only count funding that reaches local or national humanitarian 
actors through up to one intermediary towards the collective target of at least 25% of total 
international humanitarian funding channelled through those actors (Grand Bargain and DI, 2023). 
Unfortunately, most of the publicly available, disaggregated data on indirect funding provided by 
intermediaries does not contain the information needed to link it to funding that was received by 
the same intermediaries. The only exception to this is data on sub-grants within CBPF projects from 
recipients of CBPF allocations, which include the CBPF project code and can therefore be linked to 
the original CBPF allocation. In this case, the CBPF is the one intermediary for the purpose of the 
agreed Grand Bargain definition of the global 25%, which is why we exclude those sub-grants from our 
percentage calculation in Figure 2 in Chapter 1.
Otherwise, all indirect funding is included in our calculations. This is partly because the largest provider 
of indirect funding in our updated dataset underlying the calculations in Chapter 1 is the UN; these 
agencies receive most of their funding from international government donors and therefore act as 
that one intermediary. There can of course be instances of UN agencies receiving funding from an 
intermediary (e.g. the Central Emergency Response Fund) and then passing on that funding to local or 
national actors, but given that the UN partner data does not allow us to connect it to funding received 
by the same UN agencies, we cannot account for this.
There is a risk of double-counting the same funds when adding up all funding data in our dataset 
underlying calculations in Chapter 1, given that it includes both direct and indirect funding. We sought 
to reduce this risk of double-counting by paying particular attention to including funding received or 
provided by each organisation from only one data source (depending on what data source is most 
comprehensive or reliable), and by accounting for this in our methodologies for each analysis and graph 
when aggregating funding data (e.g. by excluding CBPF sub-grants or netting those from the initial CBPF 
allocation depending on the analysis). Our methodology will be made publicly available in the form of 
the scripts we used to merge the various datasets, and to produce the datasets behind each graph. 
OCHA’s CBPF sub-grant data is not yet publicly available. We welcome suggestions for improvement of 
the datasets and methodology.
The Humanitarian Policy 
Group (HPG) is one of the 
world’s leading teams of 
independent researchers and 
communications professionals 
working on humanitarian issues. 
It is dedicated to improving 
humanitarian policy and 
practice through a combination 
of high-quality analysis, dialogue 
and debate.
Humanitarian Policy Group  
ODI Global  
Four Millbank  
London SW1P 3JA  
United Kingdom  
 
Tel: +44 (0) 20 7922 0300 
Email: hpgadmin@odi.org  
Website: odi.org/hpg