Haitian migrants search for opportunity in MexicoWithout safe routes, many migrants are choosing to travel in groups for safety in their search for work and dignity.


Kate Rankin May 26 2026, 11:50am


For years, the city of Tapachula, 
Mexico
, was a transit point for people traveling north to seek refuge in the United States. Since January 2025, the Trump administration’s restrictive immigration policies, 
on top of regional pressure to curb migration
, have transformed Mexico into a country of containment. Migrants cannot work formally or access basic services. Even movement is a challenge, as migrants face lengthy bureaucratic processes just to obtain documents allowing them to move legally throughout Mexico.


Teams with Doctors Without Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) are operating mobile clinics to assist migrants within Mexico, and are providing general and mental health care. In the absence of safe migration routes, many migrants are choosing to travel in groups for safety, often on foot, in their search for work and dignity within the country. Below, Derly Sánchez Arias, MSF coordinator in 
Tapachula
, explains why migrants are taking this risk, despite the dangers and challenges they face.


By Derly Sánchez Arias, MSF coordinator in Tapachula


On the night of April 20, 2026, after hours of rain, nearly 1,000 people left Tapachula on foot and began walking along the coastal highway. They carried only the essentials: water, some food, and their few belongings. They were not marching as a political strategy or to provoke authorities. They were walking because staying was no longer an option. After more than 25 days on the road, they aim to reach Mexico City or another city that might offer them the possibility of work and a dignified life.


One of the roots of this movement lies in 
Haiti
, where a 
humanitarian crisis
, 
armed violence
, institutional collapse, and the deterioration of the health care system have made daily life unviable. This is not only about political instability: It is a humanitarian crisis in which entire families flee not only poverty, but also violence in which people — especially 
women and girls
 — are used as a territory of war. Above all, they seek protection and a small chance at a sustainable future.


Lemeus, en route from Tapachula to Mexico City


“I went several days without eating just to pay rent”


I left my home in search of better conditions. I arrived in Tapachula and faced the same challenges: finding work and a place to sleep. During my stay, I went several days without eating just to pay rent. It was hunger that ultimately pushed me to join the caravan.


What I want is to reach Mexico City, but the walk, the sun, the headaches, and the blisters on my feet are just some of the obstacles that make the journey harder.


Every time I woke up and couldn’t do anything, I felt stressed. Now, at least when I walk, I do so with a purpose: to achieve my plans and build a better life.


A city that is both a gateway and place of containment


Upon arriving in Mexico, that expectation meets a new barrier: Tapachula. The city functions as a blockade; It is a gateway but, at the same time, a point of containment where time seems to stand still. Without timely access to documents such as the Clave Única de Registro de Población (CURP) — an official identification number essential for working, accessing services, and legal status in Mexico — thousands of people remain trapped in informal shelters, with no real opportunity to rebuild their lives.


Since the beginning of 2025, MSF mobile clinics have assisted more than 1,400 people from seven caravans. Ninety-five percent of patients were older than 15, and 66 percent were women.


Djosymar, from Haiti


“Hope is what keeps me going”


I’ve been in Tapachula since December last year and I couldn’t find work. I’m a migrant — I don’t have a CURP — and that makes it harder to obtain documents and a job. I like this place, but I had no choice but to leave to try to build a better life somewhere else in Mexico.


The hardest part of the journey is the sun. The route is long, and both the weather and the exhaustion make everything more difficult. So do the chafing and the burst blisters on our feet — everything becomes extremely tough.


Hope is what keeps me going — hope, and the desire to help my grandmother, to take care of her. She still lives in Haiti. For me, she is everything; she is my motivation.


Forced stays in Tapachula are causing physical and mental harm


In Tapachula, between 20,000 and 50,000 people remain waiting, according to estimates from local NGOs. In consultations, MSF teams have heard recurring stories: Women, men, and children who have fled violence only to encounter new forms of vulnerability and 
violence in Mexico
. The impacts are not only physical; 
mental health
 consequences are also present. Many people have chronic illnesses that have gone months without treatment. People are living in overcrowded conditions, often without reliable access to food or safe drinking water, while many children remain out of school and struggle to survive on the streets.


Walking under scorching sun with open blisters is not a choice or a strategy. It is a response to stagnation. As they move forward, the caravan exposes the limits of a response that has failed to resolve the situation.


Continuing to interpret caravans as a threat is to miss the essential point: They are the result of contexts that push people out, and of journeys marked by waiting, uncertainty, and a lack of viable alternatives. They are like an open wound unable to heal — the result of violence that forces people to flee, and then follows them during transit and at borders, in rejections of asylum, and the general indifference to their plight. To see them as a threat is to deny the dignity of those who, even while in pain, keep walking with the hope of finding a place to start again and live without fear.


Malaika, a mother of two from Haiti


“Going back is not an option”


“I fled my country because of insecurity and arrived in Mexico with my two children in November 2025. After not receiving any response, my only option was to join the caravan. I was forced to take the risk and head north in search of work.


The most difficult part is walking. My feet can still keep going, but they hurt. Going back is not an option — we don’t want to return to where we came from or relive those hardships: lack of jobs, violence, and undignified living conditions.


For those of us already here, the only alternative is to rely on our own strength and keep our spirits up.


   Mexico 2026 © Ángel Rodríguez/MSF 




We speak out. Get updates.