Good morning. What conflict has raged longer than the hundred years war? The fight between the 
Ministry of Defence
 and the Treasury over defence spending.
I’d love to claim this as my own, but avoid patter theft this early in the day. So I’ll credit my colleague 
Dan Sabbagh, 
the Guardian’s defence and security editor, who spoke to me ahead of
 this week’s G7 meeting
, in France, where Keir Starmer arrived yesterday for what could be his final international summit. The prime minister can anticipate candid discussions about international partnerships in conflicts in Ukraine and the Middle East, both of which may soon demand increased involvement from the British military.
The political row over whether the UK government is spending enough to keep Britain safe and fulfil its international commitments broke into the public sphere with the resignation of defence minister John Healey last Thursday. It continues today as Al Carns, who resigned from his post as armed forced minister on the same day, tells the Guardian in an 
exclusive interview
 about “unbelievable” waste at the MoD, and suggests mismanaged programmes such as tanks investment should be scrapped in favour of new technology.
The resignation of two highly respected ministers, only one of whom reportedly fancies a shot in Downing Street, further weakens the prime minister’s position ahead of Andy Burnham’s return to the Commons if he is victorious in this week’s Makerfield byelection.
I spoke to Dan about how an argument about money exposes domestic and international uncertainties around Starmer’s leadership, Britain’s place in the world and the changing face of warfare.
Five big stories




Middle East 
| Donald Trump 
has declared that
 the strait of Hormuz will be “completely open” from Friday, as western leaders gathering at the G7 summit in Évian-les-Bains battled to prevent the fragile US deal with Iran from almost immediately unravelling.




UK politics 
| Political hatred and division in the UK is 
probably worse now
 than during the Brexit referendum, when Jo Cox was murdered, says Kim Leadbeater, Cox’s sister who is now also a Labour MP.




Crime 
| A schoolteacher described as a “serial manipulator and a serial liar” has 
been found guilty
 of sexually abusing and murdering a baby he and his partner had
 
adopted.




Environment 
| Half of the world’s children are exposed to at least three 
overlapping climate hazards
 threatening their health, education and survival, according to a Unicef report.




US news 
| Eight people are presumed dead 
after a B-52 bomber crashed 
shortly after takeoff on Monday morning at a US air force base in California’s Mojave Desert, officials said.


In depth: Starmer’s defence-spending ‘rhetoric-to-reality gap’
Prime minister Keir Starmer and his wife, Victoria, arriving in Geneva before the G7 meeting.
 Photograph: Simon Dawson/No 10 Downing Street
There isn’t a lot of agreement about what Starmer has got right in government, but our lobby team will tell you that some MPs remain swayed by his record on the international stage.
He got two things right, says Dan: support for Ukraine and keeping Britain largely out of the US-Israel war on Iran. “He’s also weathered the sheer difficulty of being a British 
Labour
 prime minister when a turbulent Republican in the White House is shifting position daily between being your friend and trying to destabilise you.”
But where Starmer has failed to shift the dial is on the strategic problem of Britain’s place in the world during a volatile time. He spoke to this at the Munich Security Conference in February, suggesting that – as the Trump administration disengaged with former allies – it provided an opportunity for “radical renewal” and a more European Nato able to “stand on our own feet”.
Taken together, these factors point to the need to progressively spend more on defence to meet Nato’s target – which Starmer has signed up to, of 3.5% of GDP by 2035. Instead, Dan explains, “we’ve got a modest step up to 2.6% by 2027 and then ‘a big blank’”. Here the essential criticism that Healey and others are making kicks in, says Dan, with “this rhetoric-to-reality gap”.
A lack of narrative
Healey resigned on 
a point of principle
 about long-term defence spending, but he also quit because the prime minister is weak, Dan says bluntly.
Circumscribed by Rachel Reeves’s much maligned fiscal rules, the Treasury has limited room for manoeuvre beyond further reallocation of spending from other parts of government, and Starmer has scant goodwill among remaining ministers. The trouble, Dan reminds me, is that Starmer’s dilemma is not only about cash that may be spent on future projects, but it is also about honouring the international commitments Britain already has signed up to.
If you’ll indulge me a tangent: spending is often presented as a zero-sum scenario between welfare and defence, and not only in the rightwing media. In April, Lord Robertson, who led the government’s Strategic Defence Review in 2025, said: “We cannot defend Britain with an ever-expanding welfare budget.” But as the Resolution Foundation’s Ruth Curtice said recently, the peace dividend – the uptick in available funding for other departments from the declining defence spend after the end of the cold war – has been spent on the entire welfare state, with the most dramatic increases in health spending, not just working-age social security.
According to 
latest Ipsos polling
, British voters are pretty evenly split on whether they favour an increase in defence spending or keeping it the same, although they are cautious about the tax-and-spend trade-offs.
The case for increased defence spending is harder to make with a population who experience no direct threat while bombs continue to drop elsewhere. This is despite the general acceptance in military circles that Britain is already under threat on home soil, be that 
electoral interference
 from foreign agents, 
targeting of synagogues
 by Iranian state proxies. Only yesterday 
a handler with ties to Russia appeared to have directed arson attacks on property connected to Starmer
.
But the problem is that the prime minister had already – very publicly – 
argued for that increase
, warning voters to beware “peddlers of easy answers” such as Reform UK and the Greens risking national security. A more effective narrative-builder than Starmer could have made the argument stick with voters – and his own cabinet.
Rebalancing Europe and 
Nato
Starmer’s words at Munich about rebalancing the relationship between Europe and the US is a thread likely to be picked up by Canadian prime minister, Mark Carney, who pledged en route to the 
G7
 meeting that “the new world order will be built starting with Europe”.
“Do not underestimate how many European countries, particularly smaller ones and those to the east, now look to Britain, as well as to France and Germany, and want leadership,” says Dan.
While initially encouraged by Starmer’s rhetoric, Dan says some Baltic states most exposed to Russian aggression are now asking: “Is Britain for real?” As he puts it: “They want nothing more than Britons to be strong and engaged, but suspect we haven’t really got the capability we say we have.”
Britain’s reliability in a moment of crisis was exposed at the start of the Iran conflict in March, when it took three weeks to deploy a warship from Portsmouth to bolster security at the British RAF base in Cyprus after a drone attack.
Changing face of warfare
There has been a “huge shift” in British military thinking, says Dan, even in the past year, as regards the type of future investment our armed forces need and one directly influenced by Ukraine’s success in transforming itself into a “drone superpower”.
When 
the Guardian interviewed Volodymyr Zelenskyy
 last week, just after his Downing Street meeting with Starmer, he was upbeat, saying the military situation was the most promising it had been for Kyiv for two and a half years.
Having dramatically built up Ukraine’s drone capability – with the help of US technology – long-range strikes on Russian oil refineries, runways and military installations are now affecting the country’s economy and wartime logistics, and – in what Zelenskyy said was a very deliberate tactic – bringing the conflict home to ordinary Russians.
Many military analysts argue that this techno-centric warfare is likely to become the model for 21st-century conflicts. But Dan offers a caution “against simplifications, that war is about one technology or another. Israel bombed Gaza quite effectively without drones; Iranian drones or missiles did not knock out US warships”.
“Neither Russia or Ukraine has sufficient combat air power, or ability to mass force numbers – meaning that in Ukraine drones have become the weapon of choice,” he adds. “Drones are additive in a modern military, not a replacement for other weapons.”
What else we’ve been reading
David Hockney in East Yorkshire in 2006.
 Photograph: Jean-Pierre Gonçalves de Lima




Jonathan Jones has written 
this heartfelt piece
 about his email exchanges and intimate dinners with the late 
David Hockney
 when the artist returned to Yorkshire from LA. 
Sinéad Campbell, newsletters team




I enjoyed 
this Science Weekly episode
 on the evidence for 
a social media ban
 for under-16s and how we make the online world a better place for all ages (clue: hold big tech to account). 
Libby




Zoe Williams has 
a moving interview
 with the actor 
Laverne Cox
 about how her identity as a transgender woman has become a challenge to the politics around her. 
Sinéad


World Cup 2026
Players of Cape Verde celebrate.
 Photograph: Xinhua/Shutterstock
On the pitch
Spain 0-0 Cape Verde
 
| No, that’s not a typo – the 64th-ranked World Cup debutants really did hold the perennial favourites to a no-score draw. “Wow, just wow”, 
Sid Lowe’s match report
 begins.
Belgium 1-1 Egypt 
| Romelu Lukaku’s threat on the pitch drew two defenders on to his first run into the box, which resulted in 
an equalising own goal
 to salvage a point from a closely fought contest.
Saudi Arabia 1-1 Uruguay
 
| Maximiliano Araújo 
scored a late equaliser
 in Miami as Uruguay battled back for a 1-1 draw against Saudi Arabia.
Iran 2-2 New Zealand 
| Iran did not seem bogged down by political baggage as they let 
their football do the talking
 in an entertaining 2-2 draw against New Zealand.
Off the pitch
England
 
| Reporting from the Three Lions camp in Kansas City, Jacob Steinberg reveals how Jordan Henderson’s changing room leadership 
could make the difference
 after the veteran midfielder was dropped from the Euro 2024 side.
My World Cup 
| Live in an America, Canadian or Mexican host city? The Guardian community team want to hear from you on what the mood’s like 
in your city right now
.
Japan
 
| For his newsletter (
sign up here!
), Jonathan Wilson writes on how Japan’s great result against the Netherlands is the clearest symbol yet that Asian teams 
are catching up
 to the titans of Europe and South America.
Today’s fixtures
 France v Senegal, 8pm BST on BBC
 Iraq v Norway, 11pm BST on BBC
 Argentina v Algeria, 2am BST on ITV
 Austria v Jordan, 5am BST on ITV
The front pages
 Photograph: The Guardian
“Social media firms hit back as PM vows to ban under-16s”, is the 
Guardian
’s front page today. The 
Times
 runs “Age checks on phones to access social media”, The 
Telegraph
 says “Starmer’s social media ban ‘a rush job’” and Metro has “PM: My ban will keep our kids safe”.
The 
FT
 leads with “Arson attacks on Starmer properties were run by pro-Kremlin hacktivists”, on the same story the 
Independent
 runs “Arson attack on Starmer linked to Russia”, and the 
i Paper
 also says “Plot to burn down Starmer’s home linked to Russian mastermind”.
The 
Mirror
 splashes “In their name” in memory of murdered MPs Jo Cox and David Amess. And the 
Express
 says “Our hope has been restored” on the assisted dying bill.
Today in Focus: The Latest
 Photograph: the Guardian
Will US-Iran peace deal hold?
The US and Iran have reached a tentative deal to end the conflict in the Middle East, but competing claims from Donald Trump and Tehran have left the details shrouded in uncertainty. Questions remain over the reopening of the strait of Hormuz, Israel’s withdrawal from Lebanon, and the future of Iran’s nuclear programme. Nosheen Iqbal speaks to Julian Borger, the Guardian’s senior international correspondent – 
watch the episode on YouTube here
.
Cartoon of the day | Ben Jennings
 Illustration: Ben Jennings/The Guardian
The Upside
A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad
Nick Dowling, with his dog Rosie and cat Tigger.
 Photograph: Jill Mead/The Guardian
Nick Dowling worked for decades in manufacturing and consultancy but when he saw a poster advertising voluntary work for the ambulance service, he signed up immediately. Soon after, the pandemic hit.
Dowling’s work went online. “Suddenly, you’re just talking to a screen,” he says. “You’re getting nothing back from it … I got bored quickly.” Meanwhile, volunteering with the ambulance service became more vital, and it led to 
a change of heart about his career goals
.
Now, at 60, Dowling has undertaken an apprenticeship and hopes to qualify as a registered nursing associate. He’s never been one to stick to a career path. “I value learning,” he says. “And I think learning and change are synonymous.”
Sign up here
 for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday
Bored at work?
And finally, the Guardian’s puzzles are here to keep you entertained throughout the day. Until tomorrow.