Good morning. The 
US has fired on an oil tanker
 attempting to reach Kharg Island in the strait of Hormuz as part of its blockade on Iranian ports. The US targeted coastal defences and missile sites, as well as targets farther north, with state media reporting strikes for the first time on the country’s capital, Tehran.
The US also said it had disabled the unladen oil tanker, firing Hellfire missiles into the ship’s smokestack after it ignored multiple warnings.
Iran responded with attacks targeting Bahrain and Kuwait. The escalating attacks come days after the ceasefire between the two sides appeared to have entirely collapsed with fears of a return ⁠to full-scale war.




What other developments have happened in the region?
 Donald Trump said 
Iran had released a US citizen
 detained since 2024, identified as Dena Karari, a dual US-Iranian citizen. Meanwhile, the Israeli defence minister, Israel Katz, told the US defence secretary, Pete Hegseth, that Israel was determined to keep its forces in “security zones” in Lebanon, Syria and Gaza.


Venezuelan man becomes 22nd person to die in ICE custody this year
Detained immigrants play soccer behind a barbed wire fence in Georgia.
 Photograph: Reade Levinson/Reuters
Another person has died in federal immigration custody this week in Georgia, officials announced on Wednesday. His is 
the 22nd death in Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) custody this year
. Jesús Manuel Arenas-Silva, a 45-year-old Venezuelan man, died on Monday morning while being transferred between detention facilities in Georgia. He was found “unresponsive” in a transport bus. ICE said the suspected cause of death was cardiac arrest.




What did the man’s family say?
 Arenas-Silva’s sister and immigrants’ rights groups in Georgia said in a press statement that ICE did not provide him with necessary medications during his time in detention for an unnamed condition, despite his family’s pleas that he take the medications during his arrest last week.




How is the crisis becoming more international?
 Mexico has formally requested that US state attorneys general criminally investigate cases of immigrants who have died in ICE custody or during raids, 
the Mexican government has said
. Since the beginning of Donald Trump’s second term, 17 Mexican immigrants have died during immigration enforcement, 14 in ICE custody and three in agency operations.


JD Vance admits errors over Epstein files release
JD Vance said the Trump administration had ‘screwed up the comms’.
 Photograph: Getty
JD Vance has agreed with criticism that 
the Trump administration botched the handling of the release of the Jeffrey Epstein files
, telling the podcast host Joe Rogan that “we absolutely screwed up the comms”.
The files have been one of the most significant political liabilities to Donald Trump since his second term began. In a lengthy interview released on Wednesday, the US vice-president told Rogan that the administration should have released all the documents from the beginning, saying: “We absolutely screwed up the comms of the Epstein files. Like, we just did. But do I think the reason we screwed up the comms is because we were trying to hide something? No.”




Why was the way the files were released 
criticised?
 After months of persistent controversy, lawmakers passed a measure that compelled the government to release a large trove of documents related to federal investigations of Epstein. In December, the justice department began releasing heavily redacted files, including photos, call logs, grand jury testimony and interview transcripts. But the redactions and the DoJ’s failure to meet a deadline to release the full files drew criticism from lawmakers and the public.


In other news …
Argentina hold a banner.
 Photograph: MB Media/Getty
Stat of the day: More than 500 feared dead after reports of two shipwrecks off Myanmar, UN says
A boat carrying Rohingya people from Myanmar in 2020.
 Photograph: Chaideer Mahyuddin/AFP/Getty
The UN has said 
more than 500 people are feared dead
 after reports of two large shipwrecks off Myanmar since late June. Preliminary information indicated that the two vessels in question departed from war-torn Myanmar’s Rakhine state in late June, with mainly members of the country’s mostly Muslim Rohingya minority onboard.
Friends enjoying some outdoor cooking.
 Photograph: Robert Deutschman/Getty
If you’re looking to up your grilling skills this summer, investing in a handful of well-made essentials is all you need – 
Sal Vaglica has you covered
.
Don’t miss this: ‘The minute I had success, I stopped taking drugs’: John Waters on 60 years of screen carnage
The performer and actor Divine with director John Waters in New York in 1975.
 Photograph: Lewton Cole/Alamy
A 
simply delightful interview
 with the “Pope of trash” who discusses dead dogs, dirty rats, “that lunatic RFK” and why there are no novelty dances any more.
… or this: What is Ukraine’s 40-day campaign against Russia and has it worked?
Volodymyr Zelenskyy arrives in Ankara.
 Photograph: Anadolu/Getty
Our senior international correspondent Peter Beaumont explains
 how taking war to the heart of Russian territory has seized the initiative for Ukraine and helped reset Volodymyr Zelenskyy’s turbulent relationship with Donald Trump.
Climate check: How global heating supercharged floods in West Africa, displacing thousands
Flooded neighbourhoods are seen in Accra, Ghana, in June.
 Photograph: HOGP/Ghana’s National Disaster Management Organisation/AP
Dozens of people drowned, hundreds had to be rescued, and thousands were displaced when floods struck the coasts of West Africa last month. Now, scientists have concluded that the rains that caused the floods were supercharged by climate breakdown, 
Damien Gayle writes
. Global heating, they say, turned what should have been a routine weather event into a climate catastrophe.
Last Thing: Lucky escape for Australian woman after bite from deadly snake caught in bike wheel
A snake tangled in a bike chain.
 Photograph: Sarah Mailey
Eastern brown snakes are highly venomous and have been called the world’s second most venomous snake, and 
a woman in her 60s is recovering after being bitten by one
 that became entangled in her bike chain in Australia.
Sign up
Sign up for the US morning briefing
First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, 
subscribe now
.
Get in touch
If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email 
newsletters@theguardian.com