United Nations 
 
Nations Unies 
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
 
The mission of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) is to coordinate the global emergency response 
to save lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. We advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for all. 
www.unocha.org 
 
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs 
 and Emergency Relief Coordinator Tom Fletcher 
Statement on the Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
We need to move faster to break the back of Ebola in the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
(DRC). 
Ituri province remains the centre of the outbreak, but the virus is spreading across other 
provinces where conflict and the constant movement of people increase the risk of further 
transmission. 
Since the outbreak was declared on 15 May, more than 1,700 people have been infected and 600 
have died in DRC. Uganda has confirmed 20 cases. Our colleagues at the World Health 
Organization and Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention are expertly supporting the 
epidemiological response under the leadership of the Government. 
But this is more than a public health emergency. Before Ebola struck, millions were already 
facing conflict, hunger, displacement, weak basic services and limited healthcare. DRC is one of 
the world's most complex humanitarian crises. Recent cuts in humanitarian funding have made 
the response even harder. 
We know how to stop Ebola and we’re implementing our strategy. 
The Inter-Agency Standing Committee – the leaders of the world's largest aid organisations – has 
activated a System-Wide Scale-Up to control the disease in the DRC.  
We have deployed a Senior Ebola Coordinator to the outbreak areas to strengthen leadership 
across the response, support operations and remove bottlenecks. 
I have released up to US$60 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund to accelerate 
the response in the DRC and help preparedness in neighbouring countries at risk – Uganda, 
South Sudan and Burundi. 
We coordinate across borders. We prepare to respond where the outbreak may go next. I remain 
in constant contact with the UN Resident and Humanitarian Coordinators in the region. 
Now we need others to act with the same urgency. 
All parties must facilitate safe and sustained access for humanitarian and health workers, 
supplies and response equipment.
United Nations 
 
Nations Unies 
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
 
The mission of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) is to coordinate the global emergency response 
to save lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. We advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for all. 
www.unocha.org 
 
Borders and supply routes must remain open. Closures and blanket travel restrictions disrupt 
humanitarian operations, health services and essential trade without preventing the spread of 
disease. 
Donors must ensure that pledged funding reaches responders quickly and flexibly. We must 
support both the Ebola response and the wider humanitarian operation that vulnerable 
communities depend on. 
And now is the time to invest in preparedness. The best defence against Ebola remains strong 
surveillance, laboratory testing, referral systems, infection prevention and control, and 
community engagement. 
Above all, trust saves lives. Communities must remain the centre of this response. Local 
leadership, accountability to people, protection against sexual exploitation and abuse, and a 
response tailored to both women and men must be integral to every part of the operation. 
Any delay will be measured in Ebola deaths and in lives lost to the wider humanitarian 
consequences of this outbreak. 
9 July 2026