Photo Caption & Credit: Children enjoying WFP school 
meals/@WFP. 
Reporting Period: May 2026 
Armenia  
COUNTRY BRIEF 
JUNE 2026 
 
 
 
USD 3.4 M required in the next six months 
(June – November 2026) 
KEY HIGHLIGHTS 
• Armenia hosted a high-level event on “Sustainable 
School Meal Programmes in Global and Regional 
Contexts,” bringing together government 
delegations, international partners, and experts to 
exchange experiences through workshops, field 
visits, and peer learning. 
• Armenia’s food security is steadily improving, 
according to the successful completion of the 2026 
Food Security and Vulnerability Assessment. dData 
shows a positive trend, with food insecurity 
dropping from 20 percent to 18 percent. 
Additionally, the proportion of marginally food-
secure households declined from 54 percent to 49 
percent, signaling greater economic resilience and 
stability for families across the country. 
• Amid heightened regional escalation centred on 
Iran, the situation along Armenia’s southern 
borders remained calm and stable, with no 
significant security incidents reported. 
SITUATION OVERVIEW 
• Armenia is an upper-middle-income, landlocked, net 
food-importing country vulnerable to shocks. 
Increasingly, Armenia is exposed to regional instability 
and external market ﬂuctuations, which aﬀect food 
prices, livelihoods and household purchasing power.  
• According to the 2024 National Statistical Service data, 
the poverty rate was 21.7 percent. While there has 
been a gradual improvement, food insecurity still 
persists in rural and other urban areas, except the 
capital. Overall, the adoption of livelihood coping 
mechanisms have decreased and the majority of 
population has the economic capacity to meet the 
essential needs.  
• In line with the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs), and to implement the Government’s 
national development agenda, WFP supports the 
Government and partners in their eﬀorts to eradicate 
food insecurity and malnutrition. 
• Through its Country Strategic Plan (2026-2030), 
WFP will transition its operations by 2030 towards 
sustainable national ownership focusing on the 
transfer of capacities, tools and models to the 
Government to achieve two integrated outcomes: 
o Outcome 1: Crisis-aﬀected people in Armenia are 
better able to meet their basic food and nutrition 
needs before, during and in the aftermath of 
crises.   
o Outcome 2: The Government of Armenia has 
enhanced systems, programmes and capacities to 
strengthen food security and reduce humanitarian 
needs by 2030. 
 
OPERATIONAL UPDATES 
Under the Country Capacity Strengthening agenda, the 
School Feeding Programme Roadmap has been
WFP Armenia Country Brief -  
June 2026 
 PAGE 2
Contact Info: wfp.yerevan@wfp.org 
Country Director: Leila Meliouh  
ﬁnalized, while the Social Protection Roadmap is in the 
ﬁnal stages of development. 
School Meals Programme 
• Under the theme of “ peace, love and school meals”, 
Armenia hosted a high-level event, “Sustainable School 
Meal Programmes in Global and Regional Contexts”, 
organized jointly by WFP and the Government of 
Armenia. Delegations from Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, 
Brazil, and the Social and Industrial Foodservice 
Institute from the Russian Federation, together with 
ambassadors, NGOs and international organizations, 
engaged in workshops and ﬁeld visits. The event 
highlighted school meals as a strategic public 
investment with multi-sectoral beneﬁts, improving 
nutrition and education, strengthening local economies 
and fostering social cohesion. Armenia was positioned 
as a strong example of Government-to-Government 
South-South collaboration and knowledge-sharing on 
nationalizing the School Meals Programme. 
• WFP, in partnership with the National University of 
Architecture  and Construction of Armenia (NUACA) 
and the School Feeding and Child Welfare Agency, 
conducted joint visits to 22 schools in Yerevan to assess 
school meal infrastructure, as part of eﬀorts to scale up 
the School Meals Programme in the capital. Based on 
these assessments, NUACA will provide construction 
and renovation calculations for schools, ensuring 
systematic upgrades.  
Social Protection  
• Demonstration of the e-learning platform’s demo 
version was conducted, intended to serve as a long-
term digital learning infrastructure for the social 
protection sector. It is designed to support a more 
structured and scalable model of staﬀ development, 
oﬀering digital coursework, learning tracking, 
certiﬁcation, and analytics. This enables a shift to a 
continuous, competency-based learning model. 
Emergency Preparedness 
• WFP, leading an interagency eﬀort with UNICEF and 
UNHCR, conducted a Market Functionality Index 
assessment in Syunik region. The tool, supporting 
market assessment for cash-based interventions, was 
expanded to include non-food items such as hygiene 
products and clothing, reﬂecting emergency priorities. 
Findings show that markets demonstrate high 
functionality with no major constraints and capacity to 
absorb increased demand. Also, preparedness eﬀorts 
are being strengthened through the ﬁnalization of a 
standby Field-Level Agreement with the Armenian Red 
Cross Society. 
Resilience and Livelihood Support  
• In the scope of the Socio-Economic Integration of 
Refugees in Armenia project, WFP supported the 
installation of solar energy infrastructure in selected 
schools of Syunik region. These investments directly 
enhance energy eﬃciency, reduce the operational costs 
of school kitchens, canteens and school-based 
agricultural infrastructure, promote energy 
independence, and establish a foundation for climate-
resilient school feeding systems. 
Monitoring and Assessments 
• WFP presented the ﬁndings of the 2026 Food Security 
and Vulnerability Assessment to representatives of the 
Government, embassies and other stakeholders. In 
2026, the proportion of food-secure households (33 
percent) has signiﬁcantly increased compared to 2024 
(26 percent). Food-secure households among displaced 
populations stand at 21 percent, compared to 38 
percent among local communities. The highest food 
insecurity rate was recorded in Gegharkunik (29 
percent). Overall, 71 percent of the population is able 
to aﬀord the Minimum Consumer Basket, indicating 
that their monthly per capita expenditure exceeds AMD 
66,989 (USD 182). In April 2026, the Consumer Price 
Index rose by 5.3 percent year on year. Food Price 
Inﬂation rose 9.5 percent compared to April 2025.  
• The exchange rate of USD/AMD was AMD 374 per 1 
USD in April 2026, down from AMD 391 in April 2025. 
The RUB/AMD exchange rate stood at AMD 4.8 per 1 
RUB, up from AMD 4.7 in April 2025.  
FUNDING OVERVIEW 
Country Strategic Plan (2026-2030) 
 
Donors - Armenia, Bulgaria, European Union, France, 
Russian Federation, South-South Opportunity Fund, 
Switzerland, United States and UN funds. 
 
FOLLOW US ON facebook.com/WFPArmenia 
 
USD13.14 MUSD5.70 M
USD3.40 M
2026 COUNTRY PORTFOLIO
6-MONTHS NET FUNDING
REQUIREMENTS
REQUIREMENT FUNDED