One of 81 children among 22 Palestinian Bedouin families comprising 137 people who were forcibly displaced from the Jiljiliya area on 16 May
following a massive settler attack. The families had previously been displaced from three other communities in 2023 due to settler violence.
Photo by OCHA.
25 May 2026
Note: Due to upcoming Eid al Adha, the next Humanitarian Situation Report on the Occupied Palestinian Territory will be issued toward
the first weekend of June 2026, covering two weeks.
Table of contents
Highlights
In just one week, more than 50 attacks by settlers across the West Bank resulted in casualties or property damage, including arson
attacks that damaged a mosque, homes, farmland and vehicles. OCHA has documented an average of six such attacks per day in
2026.
Concerns over the risk of forced displacement of hundreds of Palestinians in eastern Jerusalem governorate intensified after the
Israeli Finance Minister called for the rapid implementation of long-standing demolition orders against Khan al Ahmar.
In Gaza, humanitarian partners have launched a pest-control campaign in over 1,700 locations, while warning that their efforts are
limited by shortages and restrictions.
Only half of all aid trucks from Egypt could offload at the Israeli-controlled Kerem Shalom Crossing in the first 18 days of May, based
on data tracked by the Logistics Cluster.
Overview
The Occupied Palestinian Territory remains heavily fragmented; with people not allowed to move between the Gaza Strip and the West
Bank, and movement within each of those areas further restricted by military divisions, physical barriers, and closed zones. Combined
with ongoing violence, which keeps claiming civilian lives, these conditions are further deepening people’s humanitarian needs while
making it both difficult and unsafe for them to access support.
This past week saw new waves of displacement before previous ones had even ended, as attacks and threats once again forced people
from their homes or shelters.
For humanitarian partners, getting staff and the whole range of critical supplies to where they are needed remains extremely difficult.
Humanitarian Situation Report | 25 May
2026
West Bank
Across the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, escalating settler violence, Israeli forces’ operations, demolitions, displacement, and
movement restrictions are increasingly heightening protection risks and disrupting Palestinians’ access to essential services.
Hundreds of Palestinians living in Area C of eastern Jerusalem governorate are at risk of forced displacement, with concerns
intensifying after the Israeli Finance Minister instructed Israeli authorities to rapidly implement long-standing demolition orders against
Khan al Ahmar. Bedouin community leaders reported high levels of fear and uncertainty among residents following the announcement.
Khan al Ahmar is among 18 Bedouin and herding communities, comprising about 4,000 people, directly affected by the E1 settlement
plan between East Jerusalem and Ma’ale Adumim settlement.
Humanitarian partners have long warned that the E1 settlement plan would further fragment the West Bank, sever East Jerusalem from
the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, heighten the risk of forced displacement of Bedouin communities, and have severe
humanitarian consequences for Palestinians across the West Bank. Since 2009, OCHA has documented the demolition of about 550
structures in the 18 communities for lacking Israeli-issued building permits, which are difficult for Palestinians to obtain, including 175
donor-funded structures provided as humanitarian assistance.
According to the Shelter Cluster, between 1 January and 30 April, partners reached over 9,300 households, comprising more than
40,300 people, across the West Bank with shelter assistance, targeting displaced families and others affected by conflict-related
damage, escalating settler violence, the increasing risk of forcible displacement of entire communities, and deteriorating shelter
conditions. Assistance included shelter repairs and rehabilitation; support to displaced families in meeting basic shelter needs;
installation of protective measures such as fences, doors, and window mesh; cash assistance for rental support; and the provision of
tents, plastic sheeting, bedding kits, kitchen sets, and clothing vouchers.
To help Palestinian communities cope with displacement shocks and heightened insecurity, community-based psychosocial support
remains the primary intervention modality, complemented by recreational and structured support activities as well as parenting
sessions. On average every week, child protection partners provide mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS) to approximately
1,600 children, including about 80 children with disabilities, and more than 670 caregivers. Partners additionally reach a weekly average
of about 380 children and 100 caregivers through awareness raising sessions, including explosive ordnance risk education. Over the
past week, cash assistance as well as clothing and other in-kind assistance was provided to about 60 children and 12 caregivers to help
address urgent needs and reduce exposure to negative coping mechanisms, while 35 children received case management support,
including specialized referrals.
Casualties and Escalating Settler Violence
Between 12 and 18 May (the reporting period in this section), Israeli forces and settlers killed five Palestinians, including one child, while
nearly 60 Palestinians, including six children, were injured across the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. More than half of the injuries
occurred during settler attacks, while the remainder were mainly recorded in the context of Israeli forces’ search operations and other
raids. During the same period, OCHA documented more than 50 Israeli settler attacks against Palestinians that resulted in casualties,
property damage, or both, bringing the number of such attacks documented since the beginning of 2026 to over 870 across more than
220 communities – an average of six attacks per day.
Israeli forces shot and killed two Palestinian men while they were reportedly attempting to cross the Barrier. On 12 May, Israeli forces
opened fire toward two Palestinians attempting to scale the Barrier near Dahiyat al Bareed, in Jerusalem governorate, killing a
Palestinian man from Deir Qaddis village (Ramallah governorate) and injuring another. On 17 May, Israeli forces shot a Palestinian man
near the Barrier in Beit Ula village, in Hebron governorate, under similar circumstances. He succumbed to his wounds the following day.
Since 7 October 2023, when Israeli authorities revoked or suspended most permits issued to Palestinians to access East Jerusalem and
Israel for work and other purposes, and as of 11 May, OCHA has documented the killing of 19 Palestinians and the injury of over 290
others who were reportedly attempting to cross the Barrier.
On 14 May, Israeli forces shot and killed a Palestinian child in Al Lubban ash Sharqiya village, in Nablus governorate and withheld his
body. In a statement, the Israeli military said that soldiers had opened fire toward Palestinians near Road 60 after stones were thrown at
Israeli vehicles traveling on the road. Elsewhere in the northern West Bank, on 16 May, Israeli forces shot and killed a Palestinian man at
the entrance to Jenin Camp, which has remained a closed military zone since January 2025, reportedly while he was attempting to
enter.
In a large-scale attack across Sinjil, Jiljiliya and Abwein villages in Ramallah governorate on 13 May, Israeli forces and settlers shot and
killed one Palestinian and injured 10 Palestinians. According to local sources and video footage, dozens of Israeli settlers raided the
western area of Sinjil and nearby areas in Jiljiliya and Abwein villages, stealing Palestinian-owned livestock and other property. When
residents attempted to retrieve stolen flocks, Israeli forces and settlers fired live ammunition, rubber bullets and tear gas canisters. In a
statement, the Israeli military said forces had entered the area following reports that Palestinians had stolen sheep from a settlement
outpost, and that troops responded with crowd-control measures and live fire after stones were thrown at them while exiting the village.
Subsequently, on 16 May, 22 Palestinian Bedouin families, comprising 137 people including 81 children, in the area were forcibly
displaced from the area following recurrent settler attacks and intimidation. The families had previously been displaced from three
other communities in 2023 due to settler violence.
The reporting period saw a concerning escalation in arson attacks targeting Palestinian property, especially in Ramallah and Hebron
governorate, including incidents involving anti-Palestinian graffiti. In one incident, Israeli settlers set fire to a mosque in Jibiya village in
Ramallah governorate. In Al Mughayyir and Burqa villages, also in Ramallah governorate, settlers set fire to agricultural land, burning
olive trees and cultivated areas, with one fire spreading across about 10 dunums due to strong winds. In Wadi ar Rakhim community
near Susiya, in southern Hebron governorate, Israeli settlers threw flammable materials toward a Palestinian home, setting fire to an
external kitchen, damaging a parked vehicle, and causing damage to parts of the house.
In addition to the arson attacks, Israeli settlers carried out multiple assaults on Palestinian homes and infrastructure across Ramallah,
Nablus, Salfit and Hebron governorates. These included physical assaults against Palestinians, attacks on homes while families,
including children, were inside, damage to water and electricity infrastructure, theft and vandalism of agricultural property, and the
destruction of olive trees and fencing. In one incident in Hebron governorate on 17 May, a large group of settlers reportedly physically
assaulted four Palestinians and damaged residential structures and personal property in Umm ad Daraj community near Sa’ir village. In
Ramallah governorate, settlers from a recently established outpost near Ein ‘Arik village reportedly raided homes, physically assaulted
four Palestinians, vandalized water tanks and construction materials, and seized electric cables.
A Palestinian-owned car torched in Jibiya village, Ramallah governorate, where Israeli settlers also
set fire to a mosque and spray-painted Hebrew graffiti on its walls during one of more than 50
settler attacks documented across the West Bank during the week of 12-18 May 2026. Photo by
OCHA.
On 14, 15 and 16 May, during the annual Israeli “Jerusalem Day” and accompanying “Flag March” events, Israeli settlers and other
Israelis, including Israeli officials, marched through the Old City of Jerusalem and several Palestinian neighbourhoods in East Jerusalem
under protection by Israeli forces. Israeli forces erected barriers, restricted Palestinian movement and access, including to Al Aqsa
Mosque, and facilitated the marches throughout the Old City and surrounding areas. During the events, settlers assaulted Palestinians
and damaged Palestinian-owned property, including shops and homes, while chanting anti-Arab and anti-Palestinian slogans. In Silwan
neighbourhood, settlers physically assaulted and injured a 16-year-old Palestinian boy with a metal stick, causing facial fractures, while
in the Old City two Palestinian shop owners were injured after settlers attacked their stores and sprayed them with pepper spray.
According to local sources, Israeli forces also physically assaulted and arrested at least 20 Palestinians during the three-day events.
Demolitions and Displacement
During the reporting period, Israeli authorities demolished four homes and 20 agricultural and livelihood-related structures for lacking
Israeli-issued building permits, which are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain. Overall, 19 structures were demolished in Area C
and five in East Jerusalem, resulting in the displacement of five households comprising 26 people, including nine children, of whom 15
people were displaced in East Jerusalem and 11 in Area C.
Eighteen of the 19 structures demolished in Area C were agricultural or livelihood-related structures, including 12 structures demolished
in a single incident on 13 May in Area C of Al Marwaha area of Beit Hanina, on the Jerusalem side of the Barrier. During the incident, the
Israeli Civil Administration, accompanied by Israeli forces, demolished animal shelters, caravans, and storage and sales facilities for
construction materials, in addition to surrounding fences, affecting seven Palestinian households comprising 41 people, including 23
children. The demolition resulted in significant financial losses, as affected families were unable to remove most materials and
equipment prior to the operation.
Since the beginning of 2026, about 71 per cent of the approximately 400 structures demolished in Area C for lacking Israeli-issued
building permits have been agricultural, livelihood-related, or water and sanitation structures.
Humanitarian Impacts of Raids and Movement Restrictions
During the reporting period, OCHA documented more than 40 raids and other operations by Israeli forces across the West Bank,
involving house searches, mass detentions, temporary home evacuations, and movement restrictions, disrupting access to livelihoods,
education and essential services and heightening fear and distress among affected communities.
In multiple governorates, including Tubas, Salfit, Jenin and Nablus, Israeli forces carried out prolonged raids involving large-scale house
searches, temporary takeover of Palestinian homes for military use, detentions, and reported physical assaults. In one raid on 17 May in
Burin village, home to about 3,000 Palestinians southwest of Nablus city, Israeli forces closed all entrances to the village for nearly 19
hours, reportedly after alleging that stones had been thrown at Israeli vehicles. The closure disrupted movement and access to work
and education, forcing shops to close and leading some schools to postpone exams and suspend classes. Separately, Israeli settlers,
reportedly from nearby settlement outposts and often accompanied by Israeli forces, carried out repeated attacks against homes in
Burin village during the reporting period. At least two attacks included attempted break-ins, damage to property, and physical assaults
against residents. In one of these attacks on 13 May, a 13-year-old Palestinian girl was reportedly struck on the head with a stick by an
Israeli settler while her family attempted to protect their livestock during an attack on their home. She was treated at the scene by
Palestine Red Crescent Society paramedics.
Moreover, about 100 students attempting to reach a Palestinian school in the H2 area of Hebron city through As Salaymeh (160)
checkpoint were reportedly subjected to repeated delays and restrictive measures imposed by Israeli forces, including demands to
present birth certificates and, in some cases, be accompanied by a parent. On 11 May, 103 students were unable to reach the school
altogether. Similar restrictions and delays were again reported on 14 and 18 May, disrupting students’ access to education.
For key figures and additional breakdowns of casualties, displacement and settler violence between January 2005 and March 2026,
please refer to the OCHA West Bank March 2026 Snapshot.
Gaza Strip
The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains critical, with many displaced families continuing to shelter in overcrowded tents, schools, or
damaged structures due to the lack of safe alternatives. Access to essential services also remains severely constrained, including
limited availability of clean water and inadequate waste management systems that are unable to effectively address growing public
health risks, including the spread of pests and rodents. Many residential areas across Gaza remain unsafe and exposed to recurrent
strikes, shelling, and shooting incidents in or near populated areas.
Ongoing insecurity and access constraints are disrupting some humanitarian and community ‑ based activities, while aid workers
continue to report significant access impediments in areas where Israeli authorities require humanitarian teams to coordinate their
movements with them.
Bread production supported by the World Food Programme in Gaza. Photo by WFP
Between 16 and 17 May, humanitarian partners recorded the displacement of more than 150 families from eastern Khan Younis and
eastern Gaza city. Affected families said they fled because of tank movements or bombing. Forty of the newly displaced families have
been identified by partners as requiring emergency assistance as they fled with only what they could carry, and a response by multiple
partners has been initialized.
Simultaneously, Israeli strikes continued to be reported during the reporting period, affecting residential areas and makeshift shelters. In
one incident on 18 May, an airstrike hit Jabalya Camp, reportedly damaging 35 families’ tents and tarpaulins and displacing dozens of
them.
Data by the Ministry of Health (MoH) in Gaza indicates that between 12 and 20 May, 24 Palestinians were killed, five bodies were
retrieved, two died of wounds, and 159 people were injured. This brings the overall reported casualty toll since the announcement of a
ceasefire agreement on 10 October 2025 to 881 fatalities and 2,621 injuries, according to MoH.
Severe shortages of engine oil continue to disrupt critical water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services across the Gaza Strip. The
WASH Cluster estimates that approximately 7,000 litres are required every month and life ‑ saving activities are increasingly curtailed.
Key infrastructure is already affected, as demonstrated by the shutdown of the Sheikh Radwan stormwater lagoon in Gaza city on 11
May to preserve generator lifespan after prolonged operation. Water and wastewater levels have since risen significantly, raising the risk
of flooding in the coming weeks and posing serious public health threats, according to the WASH Cluster.
At the same time, solid waste management continues to rely on temporary dump sites located near active displacement sites.
Humanitarian partners report that displaced families are increasingly affected by skin infections and other illnesses, as rats and insects
enter shelters and contaminate food. While efforts are ongoing to improve sanitation and pest control, more sustainable responses
require restored access to Gaza’s sanitary landfills near the perimeter, where Israeli forces remain deployed, as well as the entry of
debris removal machinery and other critical supplies such as trucks, compactors, loaders, containers or personal protective equipment.
To address pest infestations, WASH Cluster partners and local organizations, in coordination with the United Nation’s Development
Programme (UNDP), have launched a response plan targeting over 1,700 locations across the Gaza Strip on 17 May. It involves spraying,
rodent control, and awareness raising activities. The supplies for the campaign – 3 tonnes of rodenticides and 3,000 litres of pesticides
– were brought into Gaza last week by UNDP. Partners indicate that a full response to rodents and pests requires the Israeli authorities
to facilitate access to Gaza’s landfills where waste can be safely disposed of and approve requests to bring into Gaza items necessary
for the removal of debris and the clearance of explosive ordnance – as well as inputs necessary to keep that equipment running.
According to the Site Management Cluster (SMC), some 1,600 displacement sites across Gaza are currently hosting about 1.7 million
people, or 354,480 households. This is based on non-exhaustive data collected through in-person visits or – in some cases – phone
interviews, between 3 February and 10 May. Nearly 88 per cent them reside in makeshift sites, while others are accommodated in
collective centres or scattered locations. Population movements over the preceding month indicate largely localized displacement
patterns, with most sites reporting no significant change, though some continue to experience inflows and outflows.
Incoming Supplies
Kerem Shalom and Zikim remain the only operational entry points for humanitarian and commercial goods into Gaza.
Between 11 and 17 May, offloading rates were 81 per cent across all corridors, with every other truck from Egypt still unable to offload at
the Israeli crossings along Gaza’s perimeter, based on data tracked by the Logistics Cluster; this does not include bilateral humanitarian
donations or the private sector.
On the commercial front, according to the Chamber of Commerce and other humanitarian partner market assessments, prices
remained elevated but generally stable with fresh products continue to show the greatest volatility.
The Cash Working Group (CWG) continues to advocate for an increased number of commercial trucks entering Gaza to support market
recovery, a reduction in fees applied to essential commodities, and a more appropriate balance between essential and non ‑ essential
items being imported to better meet priority needs and stabilize markets.
Between 7 and 20 May, the United Nation Office for Project Services (UNOPS) took into Gaza more than 2.1 million litres of diesel petrol
into Gaza and distributed just over 2 million litres of diesel (including from stocks brought in before that period) in support of
humanitarian operations.
The UN is only able to confirm the entry of supplies tracked by UN 2720. For breakdowns of those, see the online UN 2720 Mechanism
Dashboard.
For a detailed account of the latest humanitarian operations in Gaza, see Annex 1 below.
Funding
Sources: Financial Tracking System and oPt HF
Annexes
Annex 1: Humanitarian Operations in the Gaza Strip by Cluster
This section covers 11 to 17 May unless otherwise specified.
Read more −
Food Security
As of 18 May, partners provided general food assistance to 122,000 households (440,000 people) as part of the May
monthly distribution. Each family receiving two parcels, one 25-kilogram flour bag and 2.5 kilograms of high energy
biscuits, covering 75 per cent of the minimum caloric needs – the same as in April. Additional caloric needs are still
covered through other modalities.
As of 13 May, partners continued preparing and serving about 1 million meals every day through 103 kitchens and to
almost 1,800 different locations. While these efforts remain critical, partners have scaled down cooked meal production
due to funding constraints and rising operational costs. As the same time, responders are seeking to diversify assistance
modalities, to include more cash and livelihood support.
Humanitarian partners continue to support bread production through subsidized bakeries, community ovens, and
partners’ own baking facilities, producing at least 300 metric tons of bread daily – about 36 per cent of the Strip’s
estimated bread needs. More than 35 commercial bakeries are involved in these efforts, alongside flour distributions by
partners and bilateral government actors to help families bake bread at home. As of 17 May, 28 subsidized bakeries were
producing approximately 130,000 two-kilogram bread bundles per day, with about 80 per cent sold at a subsidized price of
3 NIS (US$0.85) through 168 contracted retailers and the remaining 20 per cent distributed free of charge to over 300
shelters and community sites. Meanwhile, under the “diesel-only” model, five private bakeries supported with free fuel by
humanitarian partners resumed operations late April and have gradually increased production, despite ongoing challenges
related to high fuel, spare parts, and engine oil costs.
A few examples of what is still needed: Scaling up home gardening requires strengthened technical support, including real-
time advisory channels, the use of organic compost, seed-saving practices, and the provision of seedlings to improve
germination rates. Proper site assessments are also essential to ensure feasibility, taking into account water and soil quality,
available space, and safe access for households. At a broader level, restoring local food production depends on the timely
and unrestricted entry of agricultural inputs through commercial and humanitarian channels, alongside enabling local
importers to directly source and import the materials needed to restart and sustain production at scale.
Water, Health and Sanitation (WASH)
Fifty-four partners provide approximately 24,000 cubic metres of water per day to people in more than 2,000 locations, as
74 per cent or all households in Gaza rely on such deliveries.
Between 4 and 17 May, UNICEF distributed 15,343 hygiene kits, 2,448 dignity kits, and 7,350 jerry cans benefitting almost
116,000 people.
A few examples of what is still needed: Generator and vehicle spare parts and consumables – including engine oil, air filters,
and tires – are urgently needed, alongside emergency repair kits for the Israeli Mekorot and UAE water pipelines as well as
water pipes of various sizes. Additional priorities include reverse osmosis units, spare parts and accessories for existing
systems, and solid waste compactors, as well as access to landfills near Gaza’s perimeter to ease pressure on temporary
dump sites in southern Gaza.
Health
Between 11-17 May, partners supported the medical evacuation of 59 patients, including six children, to Egypt via Rafah
Crossing, alongside 87 caregivers.
Partners provided medical consultations, with reportable diseases accounting for 21.4 per cent of the consultations
across 181 reporting sites. Increasing trends were observed in skin diseases, acute watery diarrhea, and bloody diarrhea,
while acute respiratory infections declined, likely reflecting seasonal variation.
Environmental surveillance results for March and April 2026 confirmed all samples negative for Poliovirus, marking 12
consecutive months without detection; in line with WHO guidance, the outbreak may be considered over pending
Poliovirus Outbreak Response Assessment (OBRA) desk review. A risk assessment for rodent-associated diseases
remains ongoing.
Partners completed a training on infection prevention and control (IPC) and isolation protocols for over 400 clinical staff
across five major hospitals, as well as more than 100 environmental cleaners and emergency medical services personnel.
A few examples of what is still needed: Water testing equipment and liquid chlorine supplies are lacking in hospitals, primary
health-care centres, and medical points because of administrative impediments from Israeli authorities.
For more information, see the online Heath Cluster Dashboard.
Shelter
Between 11 and 17 May, partners provided 14,429 households with shelter and non-food assistance through in-kind and
cash-based modalities. Assistance included 14,936 bedding items, 3,173 bedding kits, 2,922 tarpaulins, 1,114 sealing-off
kits, and 839 clothing kits.
The Rapid Joint Distribution Mechanism supported 55 households with emergency shelter and essential household items,
including 10 packages of tents and non-food items and 45 sealing-off kits.
Partners installed 115 emergency shelters in Gaza and Khan Younis using Shelter Cluster Emergency Shelter Kit designs
and specifications.
A few examples of what is still needed: More essential household items are needed, as available stocks are merely enough to
support fewer than 3,400 additional households. Administrative impediments imposed by Israeli authorities should be lifted
along with restrictions on shelter items.
For more information, see the Shelter Cluster website.
Protection
Between 11 and 17 May, 11 protection partners delivered lifesaving and protection-related services to almost 11,000
people:
Mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS), including psychological first aid and individual and group
counselling, was provided to 8,259 people;
Legal aid and legal awareness support was provided to 219 people;
Referrals and case follow-up were provided to 232 people;
Other support was provided to 341 persons with disabilities;
Group psychosocial support sessions were provided to 350 people;
Mine action and explosive ordnance risk education were provided to 168 people;
Relief was distributed to 1,265 people;
Staff-care activities were conducted for 25 responders.
During the same period, partners offered services to 146 returnees from Egypt; since the reopening of the Rafah border
and as of 14 May, 2,429 returnees have been assisted, including 885 currently receiving follow-up protection services.
Protection monitoring activities continued through eight focus group discussions and 130 key informant interviews
across 16 neighbourhoods, reaching 1,155 people.
A few examples of what is still needed: It is critical to address the psychological distress affecting staff members, alongside
persistent fuel shortages, rising transportation costs, cash flow constraints, and the limited availability of essential materials
and spare parts.
For more information, see the online Protection Cluster dashboard.
Child Protection
Between 11 and 17 May, partners:
provided MHPSS services to over 4,000 children and approximately 1,500 caregivers. Services included structured
psychosocial support sessions, recreational and resilience-building activities, art and drama interventions, individual
counselling, Psychological First Aid, parenting support, and community-based psychosocial programmes.
conducted child protection awareness and community-based protection activities for another 4,700 children and
caregivers through awareness sessions, risk mitigation activities, positive parenting sessions, safety mapping exercises,
and community outreach across shelters, camps, schools, and displacement sites;
provided individual case management support to 56 newly identified high-risk children, while continuing follow-up for
more than 3,000 active child protection cases involving children without parental care, highly distressed children, and
children exposed to violence, neglect, exploitation, family separation, and unsafe living conditions.
conducted 135 follow-up contacts for unaccompanied and separated children to assess wellbeing, care arrangements,
and protection concerns;
A few examples of what is still needed: Additional funding and operational support are needed to sustain high-risk child
protection case management, MHPSS services, outreach activities, and child-friendly spaces, many of which face
disruptions. Partners also require increased fuel, transportation, and operational supplies to maintain home visits, referrals,
and follow-up activities, particularly in underserved and newly displaced areas. Additional trained case workers, MHPSS
specialists, accessible safe spaces, and psychosocial materials are also needed to respond to growing protection concerns
among children and adolescents across Gaza.
M ine Action
UNMAS conducted 36 explosive hazard assessments in support of debris removal and other partner activities, and three
inter-agency missions.
Partners conducted explosive ordnance risk education activities, reaching almost 3,480 people between 10 and 14 May.
Since the October 2025 ceasefire announcement, 109 accidents have been recorded, leading to 265 Palestinians injured
and 49 killed.
Emergency Telecommunications
Between 11 and 17 May, ETC continued close collaboration with UNDSS on the Communications Plan, providing final
technical inputs with completion expected by 31 May.
Coordination also continued with PRCS and ICRC to support technical recovery of the damaged VHF network in Gaza,
building on earlier VHF coverage assessments conducted along the Gaza city–Zikim route.
A few examples of what is still needed: Despite progress, connectivity in Gaza remains severely constrained, limiting
humanitarian coordination. The VHF network remains only partially functional due to security constraints and limited
technical capacity.
** Double asterisks indicate that a figure, sentence, or section has been rectified, added, or retracted after the initial publication of this
update.