Page 1 Page 1  
 
   
Situation report  
No. 8 
28 May 2026 
Data as of 27 May  
 
 
 OVERVIEW 
 
KEY AFFECTED 
COUNTRIES Displaced Injured Deaths 
Iran 3 200 000 33 806 3 375 
Lebanon 1 049 328 9571 3151 
Iraq N/A 300 109 
Israel N/A 7 834 26 
All numbers are estimates and may differ from other sources due to data cutoff times. Estimates may be  
revised upward or downward over time.  
ATTACKS ON 
HEALTH CARE 
 Attacks 
verified by 
WHO 
Injured Deaths 
Iran 26 0 11 
Lebanon 182 311 125 
Israel 9 0 0 
As reported in WHO’s Surveillance System for Attacks on Health Care (SSA), where active. There may be  
delays in verification and changes upwards or downwards due to data consolidation. 
 
ACUTE HEALTH THREATS 
 
Despite the ongoing ceasefires, the situation is fragile, particularly in Lebanon. Acute health threats remain 
since the last reporting period. Persistent constraints in global fuel supply chains continue to challenge health 
services in many locations.  
 
WHO GLOBAL AND REGIONAL RESPONSE 
 
Due to persistent global constraints in health commodity supply chains, WHO continues to leverage alternative 
modalities to ensure continued provision of essential health services. 
 
Risk communication and community engagement materials and preparedness guidance have been developed 
and disseminated to support communities and health responders during the current regional escalation. The 
resources include public communication and food safety materials for Eid al-Adha, alongside comprehensive 
guidance addressing risks related to disruptions in energy, food, water, and environmental services. Tailored 
information has been prepared for vulnerable populations, caregivers, and frontline workers, with specific 
content on trauma response and chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, and explosive (CBRN) 
preparedness. 
 
For additional information on the global situation and response, please visit https://www.who.int/emergencies/situations/middle-east-conflict. For details 
on attacks on health care, please visit https://extranet.who.int/ssa/Index.aspx.  
 
COUNTRY HIGHLIGHTS 
 
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN 
 
Situation  
 
The ceasefire remains fragile as negotiations continue; attacks have been reported to the area in southern Iran 
around the Strait of Hormuz.  
 
WHO response 
 
Implementation of WHO’s support to the Ministry of Health continues, including uninterruptible power supply 
systems for health facilities and noncommunicable disease items to ensure health services continuity.  
 
Training of health workers on mental health and psychosocial support is ongoing. 
 
LEBANON
Page 2 Page 2  
 
Situation 
 
Despite the ongoing ceasefire in Lebanon, the security situation remains highly volatile: there have been 1774 
injuries and 608 deaths since 16 April. The threat of expansion of military activities raises grave concerns for 
the health of the population.  
 
Since the ceasefire took effect, a total of 27 attacks on healthcare have been reported, causing 25 deaths and 
42 injuries. To date in this conflict, a total of 16 hospitals and 13 primary health care centres have been 
damaged in attacks on healthcare. Three hospitals remain closed. Last week, the World Health Assembly 
adopted a decision on protection of health care in Lebanon. The resolution called for scaled-up international 
and WHO support to strengthen access to health services in conflict settings. 
 
Access to maternal health services and acute medical care remains critically constrained south of the Litani 
River, with patients facing delays of up to 48 hours to secure clearance for movement to referral facilities, 
posing serious risks to patient outcomes, including increased maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality. 
 
Preliminary findings from a rapid health assessment conducted in May 2026 across 15 affected districts 
indicate that access to healthcare remains severely constrained, with 60-80% of households unable to afford 
services, particularly medications and hospitalization. 
 
There are many outstanding needs. Flexible and rapid funding is urgently required to sustain emergency health 
operations and ensure uninterrupted lifesaving services. Enhanced access is critical to restore outreach 
services. Expanded shelter- and community-based surveillance is required to ensure early detection and rapid 
response to communicable disease threats. Expanded risk communication and community engagement are 
needed to improve awareness of available services, encourage early care-seeking, and reduce health risks. 
Replenishment of essential medicines and supplies is needed to ensure service continuity.  
 
Through the WHO-coordinated Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN), a Request for 
Assistance for the “Middle East Escalation of Violence, Lebanon, 2026” was issued to support the response 
with epidemiology and surveillance expertise. One epidemiology expert from the UK Public Health Rapid 
Support Team (UK-PHRST), a GOARN partner, has been deployed to Beirut for a two-month mission until mid-
July 2026. GOARN continues to monitor partner capacity and readiness for rapid mobilization and additional 
support if required. 
 
WHO response 
 
To date, WHO has distributed 120 trauma backpacks to ambulances and emergency medical services teams.  
WHO continues to support trauma hospitalization for non-Lebanese patients for the current escalation of 
hostilities that started since 2 March, with a total of 101 individuals supported to date, the majority Syrian, 
complementing government efforts to ensure proper coverage for all affected populations. WHO is supporting 
the costs for treatment of individuals with severe mental health needs. WHO is currently the only organization 
providing support for such cases; without this support, these individuals would likely have been unable to 
receive the necessary care.  
 
WHO is assessing options to support the provision of ambulances to address critical gaps. 
 
For additional information on the situation and response in the Eastern Mediterranean region, please visit https://www.emro.who.int/emergencies/middle-
east-conflict/. 
 
Funding updates 
 
WHO’s US$ 30.3 million emergency appeal to support health operations across five Middle Eastern countries 
remains critically underfunded, with only 13% (US$ 4.1 million) received so far.