WFP’s Integrated Cross-Cutting 
Context Analysis and 
Risk Assessment in Ukraine
APRIL 2026
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  2
t
PAGE  3
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
t
Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information product for 
educational or other non-commercial uses are authorized without any prior 
written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully 
acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or 
other commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission. Applications 
for such permission should be addressed to the Director, Communications, 
Advocacy and Marketing Division
E-mail: wfp.publications@wfp.org
© World Food Programme 2024 All Rights Reserved.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  4
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary        9
Backgr
ound
         
9
Study Objective and Method
       
10
Key finding
         11
Conclusions
         
16
Introduction
         
20
Background
         
20
Methodology
 
32
Analytical Framework
        
32
Data Collection  
       
32
Challenges and Limitations  
      
36
Lessons from Adapting the I-CARA Framework to the Ukrainian context
 38
Main findings
         40
Cr
oss-cutting community findings
      40
Community-Specific Finding
       54
Men (18-59)
         62
Older people (59+)
        67
Roma community 
        71
People with Disabilities 
       77
Internally 
Displaced People  
      
83
LGBTQIA+ communities
       93
People 
Living with HIV/AIDs  
      
103
Conclusion & Recommendations
      108
Impr
oving access to humanitarian aid 
      108
Enhancing accountability and communication 
     109
PAGE  5
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Adopting inclusive and conflict-sensitive ta geting     109
Safeguar
ding
         
110
Expanding livelihood opportunities  
     
110
Strengthening protection and inclusion 
     111
Fostering community cohesion and social integr
ation 
    111
Evolving Gender and Social Norms 
      112
Localization and the r
ole of national and local actors 
    112
Anne
xes
       
   114
Anne
x A. Analytical Framework
       
114
Annex B. Desk Review
        117
Anne
x C. Detailed breakdown of FGDs per oblast
    120
Anne
x D. Anonymized lists of data collection participants
   121
List of photo cr
edits
        124
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  6
ACRONYMS
AAP Accountability to Affected Peopl
ADRA Adventist Development and Relief Agency
AIDS Acquired Immunodeficiency Synd ome
ART Antiretroviral Therapy
CCCM Camp Coordination and Camp Management
CSO Civil Society Organization
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization
FGD Focus Group Discussion
FSL Food Security and Livelihoods
GAU Gay Alliance Ukraine
GBV Gender-Based Violence
HCT Humanitarian Country Team
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Viru
IASC Inter-Agency Standing Committee
ICRC International Committee of the Red Cross
IRC International Rescue Committee
IFES International Foundation for Electoral Systems
IOM International Organization for Migration
KII Key Informant Interview
LGBTQIA+ Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, Intersex, Asexual, and 
others
MHPSS Mental Health and Psychosocial Support
MSM Men who Have Sex with Men
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NAPD National Assembly for Persons with Disabilities
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
NRC Norwegian Refugee Council
OCHA UN Office for the Co dination of Humanitarian Affair
OECD DAC Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development's 
Development Assistance Committee
PLHIV People Living with HIV
PTSD Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
PWID People who Inject Drugs
SESU State Emergency Service of Ukraine
TB Tuberculosis
PAGE  7
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
TCR Territorial Centres of Recruitment
UAH Ukrainian Hryvnia
UNAIDS Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund
USD United States Dollar
WASH Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WFP World Food Programme
WHO World Health Organization
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  8
Executive 
Summary
PAGE  9
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Background
As Ukraine enters the fifth year of the full-scale invasion, the country remains 
heavily affected y ongoing hostilities. As of early 2025, 3.7 million people remain 
internally displaced, 6.9 million are refugees abroad, and over 40,838 civilian 
casualties have been recorded.1 The impact is most severe in frontline oblasts such 
as Donetsk, Kharkiv, Kherson, Luhansk, Mykolaiv, Odesa, Sumy, and Zaporizhzhia.2 
Continued displacement has deepened poverty, strained social protection systems, 
and disrupted livelihoods; particularly in rural and conflict-affected eas, where 
unemployment remains high.3 Social transfers, including pensions and targeted 
assistance to displaced people, have played a crucial role in preventing further 
hardship, but coverage may not be reaching hard-to-reach groups such as people 
without documentation, and hidden groups like Roma communities, LGBTQIA+ 
individuals, and people living with HIV/AIDS, or men avoiding military conscription.4 
The psychological toll of the prolonged conflict is also g owing, with 63 percent of 
households reporting mental health challenges related to ongoing uncertainty and 
displacement.5 According to Ukraine’s 2025 Humanitarian Needs and Response 
Plan, 12.7 million people in Ukraine are in need of assistance. Among them, 45 
percent are women, 30 percent are older people (60+ years old), 15 percent are 
children, and 14 percent have disabilities.6 
Within this context, the humanitarian aid landscape is shifting due to funding 
constraints and a gradual transition from emergency relief to resilience-building 
efforts 7 Emergency assistance is incr
 easingly concentrated in frontline and war-
affected oblasts, while support in cent al and western Ukraine is being scaled 
back as international organizations shift their strategies away from short-term 
emergency aid toward resilience- and development-oriented programming in 
areas perceived as more stable.8 However, humanitarian actors have raised 
1  UNHCR. 2024. Multi-year strategy 2025-2027.; UN Human Rights. 2024. Ukraine: Protection of 
civilians in armed conflict.
2  UNHCR. 2024.  Multi-year strategy 2025-2027. 
3  IOM. 2024. Employment, Mobility and Labour Market Dynamics in Ukraine.; World Bank. 
2024. Listening to citizens of Ukraine: the poverty and human impacts of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
4  World Bank. 2024. Listening to citizens of Ukraine: the poverty and human impacts of Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine. 
5  OCHA. 2025. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2025. https://reliefweb.int/
report/ukraine/ukraine-humanitarian-needs-and-response-plan-2025-january-2025-enuk 
6  OCHA. 2025. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2025. 
7
  OCHA. 2023. Ukr
aine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2024.; SwissInfo. 2024. Donor 
fatigue looms over humanitarian aid in Ukraine after two years of war.
8  KII 15, INGO staff; KII 18, IO staff; KII 12, IO st
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  10
concerns that this shift may create gaps in assistance for vulnerable populations 
who continue to depend on support in these more stable areas where aid is being 
scaled back. 
As operations become more localized, humanitarian actors have also expressed 
concerns about the capacity of Ukraine’s social security system to take over 
responsibilities currently handled by international organizations . This is largely 
due to budget pressures, a shortage of qualified personnel, particularly in social
services, and the destruction of essential facilities caused by missile strikes.
9 
Concerns have also been raiseed about the long-term sustainability of aid delivery, 
particularly as the war drags on and humanitarian needs continue to grow.
10 
Local organizations also worry that cross-cutting aspects of humanitarian work 
–  such as gender equality, accountability to affected people, the p evention of 
sexual exploitation and abuse, and disability inclusion – may be deprioritized amid 
international funding cuts, due to limited capacity and competing government 
priorities.
11 
As Ukraine navigates these ongoing challenges, a balanced approach between 
emergency response and long-term resilience-building is essential to ensure that 
basic needs are met, social tensions between recipients and non-reciepients of aid 
are minimized, and economic recovery is supported.
Study Objective and Method
To support more effective and principled humanitarian action in Uk aine, the 
World Food Programme (WFP) contracted Voluntas and Info Sapiens to apply 
the Integrated Cross-Cutting Context Analysis and Risk Assessment (I-CARA). The 
analysis aimed to deepen understanding of the complex and evolving context and 
provide inclusive, risk-informed, and contextually grounded humanitarian action in 
Ukraine.
To implement this assessment, Voluntas and Info Sapiens conducted 20 key 
informant interviews (KIIs) with representatives of local NGOs, civil society 
organizations, international organizations, cluster representatives, and local 
government officials. Additional , 40 focus group discussions (FGDs) were held 
with community members, including adult and older women and men, as well 
as hard-to-reach groups such as internally displaced persons, persons with 
disabilities, Roma communities, LGBTQIA+ individuals, and people living with HIV/
AIDS. To complement and inform data collection, an extensive desk review was 
9  Kyiv School of Economics. 2024. Report on damages to infrastructure from the destruction 
caused by Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine.
10  SwissInfo. 2024. Donor fatigue looms over humanitarian aid in Ukraine after two years of war. 
11  KII 20, working group staff
PAGE  11
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
conducted using publicly available sources and materials shared by participants. 
The data collected was then triangulated and synthesized, with key findings
summarized below and detailed throughout the report.
Key findings
Cross-cutting community findings
The war in Ukraine has disrupted access to food and essential services, including 
healthcare, utilities, water, housing, and education, for both displaced and host 
communities. Access to these basic services is increasingly undermined by 
infrastructure damage, rising costs, and displacement.
The war has placed the Ukrainian healthcare system under pressure, particularly 
in smaller towns and frontline areas. Long waiting times, a shortage of specialists, 
and the high cost of private services restrict access for many, especially for older 
adults, people with disabilities, LGBTQIA+ individuals, and those living with chronic 
health conditions such as HIV. Displaced individuals face bureaucratic hurdles, 
including the need to register with family doctors to access care. Many doctors are 
at full or limited capacity, forcing people to seek treatment at other, often distant, 
facilities. In areas like Donetsk and Kherson, limited services are temporarily 
sustained by mobile clinics and intermittent humanitarian interventions.
As for utilities and energy, power outages are frequent, especially in conflict
affected zones, disrupting heating, lighting, and cooking. High electricity prices,
along with damaged power plants and heating infrastructure, have forced 
communities to turn to alternative heating sources such as gas, wood, and 
briquettes – supplies that are increasingly expensive or scarce. These challenges 
are further compounded by lower pensions and wage growth relative to food 
price increase, which have not kept pace with utility costs, forcing families to make 
difficult choices between essential need
Water access and quality also vary significantl . In regions like Vinnytsia, reliance 
on poor-quality well water is common, while in Donetsk, water output has 
decreased dramatically, leading residents to depend on irregular water deliveries. 
Despite significant national inc eases in water tariffs, access to safe, eliable, and 
affo dable water remains elusive, especially in rural and frontline communities.
While food is generally available, it has become less affo dable, particularly 
for female-headed households, the Roma community, and internally displaced 
people. To cope with food insecurity, individuals resort to cheaper, less nutritious 
food or skip meals to feed their children. Households in frontline regions face 
compounded risks due to disrupted supply chains and limited access to fresh 
produce and protein-rich foods. Although food assistance is provided, concerns 
about quality, spoilage, and the lack of tailored items for individuals with dietary
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  12
restrictions – such as those with diabetes or heart conditions – persist. 
Education has been disrupted by destroyed school infrastructure, poor internet 
connectivity, and persistent power outages. Many children in frontline oblasts 
have not attended in-person classes since 2022, raising long-term concerns about 
learning loss. Remote learning has proven especially ineffective for child en with 
disabilities, who require specialized support that is largely unavailable in online 
formats. Though efforts such as school meals support and winterization initiatives
offer some elief, systemic barriers remain.
To address basic needs, cash assistance is widely preferred due to its fl xibility, 
allowing households to prioritize essential expenses such as food, rent, and 
medicine. Nonetheless, in-kind aid remains critical in frontline and rural areas 
where access to markets is limited. However, physical and informational 
barriers hinder aid access. Long curfews, reduced public transportation, 
destroyed infrastructure, and limited digital literacy make it difficult for many 
especially the elderly, people with disabilities, and rural residents – to reach aid 
distribution points or complete online applications. Documentation requirements 
further exclude displaced people and marginalized groups, such as the Roma 
community, who often lack proper identification
Social cohesion has fluctuated. While tensions initially ose between host 
communities and displaced individuals, shared hardship and mutual aid have 
gradually rebuilt trust. In many communities, informal networks continue to 
provide critical support, such as helping neighbours with daily tasks or sharing 
food and essentials. Still, perceived inequities in aid distribution remain significant
conflict sensitivity risks, th eatening community trust and potentially fuelling 
resentment. These concerns are particularly acute in contexts where aid is viewed 
as politicized or unevenly distributed, such as when local authorities or influential
individuals are perceived to favour certain groups or regions over others. In such 
cases, community members may believe that access to assistance depends more 
on personal connections or political affiliations than on actual nee
Humanitarian communication and accountability mechanisms are mixed. Aid 
information is shared via digital platforms like Telegram, Facebook, and Viber, as 
well as traditional media such as radio, billboards, and SMS. While these efforts
are essential, many respondents report confusion and frustration over unclear 
eligibility criteria and changing requirements. Direct phone calls, hotlines, and face-
to-face communication remain crucial for improving clarity and trust – particularly 
among those with limited digital access or literacy.
Despite efforts to imp ove inclusion and feedback, many data collection 
respondents reported feeling excluded from decision-making processes related 
to aid. There is a strong desire for greater transparency, participatory approaches,
PAGE  13
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
and dignity in assistance – such as enabling people to choose needed items or 
reducing the public visibility of aid collection.
Community-specific findings
Women
Women are increasingly becoming the primary breadwinners in households and 
taking on roles traditionally dominated by men. However, financial const aints 
make it difficult to afford basic necessities such as healthcare, food, utilities, and 
hygiene products, forcing some women to prioritize certain needs over others. 
Additionally, limited childcare options make it difficult for mothers to balance pai
work and caregiving, creating a significant barrier to empl yment. Amid rising 
prices, many women continue to engage in informal or part-time work – such as 
housekeeping, sewing, baking, or recycling materials – due to limited employment 
opportunities, caregiving responsibilities, or skill constraints. This type of 
employment, which is often low-paid and lacks social protections, reinforces the 
existing wage gaps between men and women. These shifts in household roles and 
economic pressures can exacerbate existing tensions or introduce new risks of 
gender-based violence (GBV) or exploitation.
Men
Conscription has become a major obstacle for men in Ukraine, discouraging them 
from public activities like registering for assistance or seeking formal employment. 
Official jobs equire documentation from Territorial Centres of Recruitment (TCR), 
but fear of mobilization deters many men from visiting TCR offices. Emp yers 
are equally hesitant to hire men, anticipating potential changes to the regulations 
that could lead to conscription. Consequently, many men opt for unofficial work
which provides income but lacks stability, legal safeguards, and social benefits.
This persistent threat of mobilization heightens their sense of insecurity, restricting 
movement and everyday routines, and in some cases, compelling men to hide to 
avoid being drafted.
Older People
Most older data collection participants depend on modest pensions, which can 
barely cover rising healthcare, food, hygiene, and utility costs. They face isolation, 
limited mobility, and low digital literacy, which hinders both access to basic 
services and the ability to receive assistance. Local communities often help fill
these gaps by sharing information and supporting older people in registering for 
and accessing assistance. Additionally, some older people try to supplement their 
income through work, though chronic health issues and limited physical capacity 
often prevent them from taking on physically demanding roles. However, even in 
less strenuous jobs, employers are often reluctant to hire older individuals.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  14
Roma Community  
Roma participants r
eported persistent ethnic discrimination severely restricting 
their access to public services and leading many to avoid state institutions. This 
often results in individuals lacking essential identification documents, such as
birth certificates or passports, further limiting their access to basic services and
assistance. Some NGOs also exclude Roma from aid distribution lists, influenced
by stereotypes that depict Roma communities as too isolated to engage with.  
Additionally, low literacy levels and limited formal education sharply reduce 
employment opportunities and access to skilled labour markets. Within Roma 
communities, leadership is generally centralized around a community leader, while 
the patriarchal cultural and gender norms often grant men greater freedom of 
socialization, with women expected to limit their interactions to close family circles. 
People with Disabilities 
Since the escalation of the war, the number of people with disabilities has 
increased. Individuals with limited mobility face significant challenges accessing
water during supply outages, while power cuts leave homebound individuals 
stranded, and those reliant on electric wheelchairs immobilized due to charging 
issues. Many facilities, including shelters, remain physically inaccessible due to 
the absence of elevators or ramps. Additionally, employment rates for people 
with disabilities remain low, driven by persistent discrimination, stereotypes 
questioning their ability to perform job duties or maintain long-term employment, 
and a lack of workplace adaptations. Although this group continues to benefit from 
aid, assistance has notably declined for those with third-group disabilities because 
support now prioritizes people in the most vulnerable situations, reflecting stricter
eligibility criteria and reduced resources.
Internally Displaced People  
Housing remains one of the most urgent issues for internally displaced people, 
especially in urban areas where high rent costs, limited affo dable housing, 
discrimination by landlords, and unstable rental markets contribute to housing 
insecurity. Additionally, internally displaced people face challenges securing stable 
employment due to widespread business closures and relocations caused by 
ongoing war. However, some displaced people have found opportunities through 
relocated enterprises or by starting their own business. Others highlighted the 
need for vocational training programs that provide skills in high-demand fields,
such as the IT sector and truck driving. While diffe ences in aid distribution 
have sometimes caused tension between internally displaced people and 
host communities – especially when locals perceive that displaced individuals 
receive more support – aid has also served as a bridge for solidarity. In some 
cases, internally displaced people have shared food or resources with struggling 
neighbours, creating informal support networks.
PAGE  15
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
LGBTQIA+
Before the full-scale invasion, LGBTQIA+ individuals in Ukraine were already 
among the most marginalized, facing widespread stigma and discrimination. The 
ongoing conflict has d amatically intensified these vulne abilities, particularly for 
the estimated 300,000 LGBTQIA+ people who are internally displaced. Many avoid 
public shelters due to fears of being outed or harassed. Access to gender-affirmin
care, especially for transgender people, is limited by stigma and administrative 
obstacles, such as difficulties in eceiving the F64.0 diagnosis needed for legal 
gender recognition. Though public support for LGBTQIA+ rights has grown, 
targeted support remains scarce. Community members often rely on LGBTQIA+-
led organizations, which provide critical services like safe shelters, food assistance, 
and psychosocial support. Many LGBTQIA+ people avoid non-specialised 
humanitarian services due to safety concerns, privacy risks, and fear of identity 
exposure. For this community, inclusive, anonymous, and sensitively delivered 
assistance is a necessity .
People living with HIV/AIDs 
The conflict has disrupted HIV/AIDS ca e across Ukraine. While access to 
antiretroviral therapy has resumed in many areas, a shortage of specialists, 
destroyed infrastructure, and displacement have left many people living with HIV 
(PLHIV) vulnerable. Confidentiality b eaches, stigma, and long wait times further 
complicate access to care. Most PLHIV prefer to receive aid from specialized NGOs 
they already trust. Many avoid state-run programs for fear of their HIV status 
being exposed. Employment remains difficult due to discrimination, and lega
protections are weak.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  16
Conclusions
As Ukraine enters the fifth year of full-scale war, the humanitarian landscape 
remains complex and rapidly evolving. The I-CARA assessment offers a 
comprehensive understanding of the diverse needs, risks, and coping strategies 
of affected populations, particularly those in hard-to-reach and marginalized 
communities. These insights are intended to guide inclusive, context-sensitive 
humanitarian programming that balances immediate relief with long-term 
resilience, while also strengthening trust, accountability, and community 
cohesion.
Access to Aid and Services
Access to humanitarian assistance remains a pressing challenge, 
especially in frontline and rural areas where infrastructure damage, 
curfews, and limited transport restrict mobility. While cash assistance is 
widely preferred for its fl xibility, in-kind aid remains vital where markets 
are disrupted or unavailable. Barriers such as digital exclusion and 
documentation requirements disproportionately affect older people,
persons with disabilities, and Roma communities. Some rely heavily on 
informal networks or are forced to discontinue medical treatment due 
to unaffo dable costs. Maintaining both cash and in-kind modalities is 
therefore critical to ensuring inclusive coverage and avoiding further 
exclusion.
Accountability and Communication 
Despite diverse communication efforts, many community members
report confusion about aid eligibility and procedures. Direct, 
personalized communication, via hotlines, phone calls, and face-to-face 
interactions, remains the most trusted and accessible, particularly in 
rural and frontline areas. Feedback mechanisms are in place but vary 
in effectiveness, with participants st ongly calling for more transparent, 
responsive, and dignified app oaches to aid delivery that reduce stigma 
and strengthen community participation.
PAGE  17
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Inclusive and Conflict-Sensitive Targeting
Perceptions of fairness in aid distribution are closely tied to 
transparency and participation. Marginalized groups, including 
Roma, LGBTQIA+ individuals, and people with disabilities, often feel 
excluded due to rigid documentation requirements and reliance on 
digital systems. Participants highlighted the importance of fl xible, 
inclusive targeting approaches that recognize diverse vulnerabilities, 
such as undocumented individuals, older persons experiencing age 
discrimination, and Roma individuals facing ethnic profiling, to educe 
tensions and ensure equitable access.
Protection and Safeguarding
Safety and dignity in aid delivery are paramount, particularly in conflict
affected egions where overcrowding, long queues, and exposure to 
hostilities pose risks. Certain groups, such as LGBTQIA+ individuals, 
Roma women, and people living with HIV/AIDS, face compounded 
protection risks due to stigma or fear of discrimination. Tailored and 
discreet delivery methods, alongside culturally sensitive approaches, are 
critical to safeguarding dignity and minimizing harm.
Livelihoods and Economic Recovery
The war has severely disrupted livelihoods, with widespread 
unemployment and reliance on informal work, remittances, and 
humanitarian aid. Structural barriers—including limited childcare, 
age discrimination, and accessibility gaps—disproportionately affect
women, older adults, and persons with disabilities. Vocational training 
and reskilling programs, especially when designed with or led by 
marginalized communities, were identified as valuable pathways to
recovery and reducing long-term dependency on aid. 
Social Cohesion and Integration 
While solidarity has grown in many communities, perceived inequities in 
aid distribution and persistent cultural or ethnic discrimination continue 
to strain relationships. Community-led initiatives, shared activities, 
and inclusive engagement strategies have proven effective in fostering
resilience, building trust, and supporting the integration of displaced 
persons into host communities.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  18
Evolving Gender and Social Norms
The conflict has eshaped gender roles, with women increasingly 
assuming household provider roles and men facing mobility restrictions 
and economic marginalization due to conscription. These shifts 
highlight the need for programming that recognizes changing dynamics, 
addresses emerging vulnerabilities, and promotes equitable access to 
services and opportunities for both women and men.
Localization and Coordination
As humanitarian efforts shift f om emergency relief toward resilience-
building, the role of national and local actors has become increasingly 
prominent. While local organizations and authorities are well-placed 
to identify needs, their influence in st ategic decision-making remains 
limited. Strengthening partnerships between international and local 
actors, while upholding cross-cutting priorities such as inclusion, 
safeguarding, and accountability, will be essential to ensuring 
sustainable and context-sensitive humanitarian action.
PAGE  19
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Introduction
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  20
INTRODUCTION
Research purpose & scope
To support more effective and principled humanitarian action in Uk aine, the 
Integrated Cross-Cutting Context Analysis and Risk Assessment (I-CARA) was 
conducted to deepen organizations’ understanding of the complex and evolving 
context. This approach integrates protection, accountability to affected people
(AAP), gender, and conflict sensitivity to identify and mitigate risks, ensuring that
strategies and interventions by humanitarian actors are responsive, inclusive, and 
grounded in local realities. 
Voluntas and Info Sapiens (IS) assisted the World Food Programm (WFP) in 
applying the I-CARA framework, providing comprehensive insights into the 
Ukrainian context. The analysis supports the design of inclusive, risk informed 
and context-sensitive humanitarian activities that address the diverse needs of 
women, men, people with disabilities, and other people in vulnerable situations. 
Recognizing that conflict and food insecurity ffect individuals d ffe ently, the 
exercise also informs targeting strategies.
The analysis identifies potential risks the d ffe ent groups face, considering threats, 
vulnerabilities, capacities, and coping mechanisms. It examines differing needs
based on gender, age, disability status, and other identity factors to ensure that 
assistance reaches those most at risk. Additionally, it examines human rights 
violations, including protection risks, while assessing negative coping strategies 
related to food security and livelihoods. The study also examines exclusion risks 
linked to gender, language, and social/health status.
Background
Ukrainian context
Russia’s full-scale invasion on February 24, 2022, led to mass displacement, severe 
infrastructure damage, and significant civilian casualties. The escalation has been
described as the largest conventional military attack on a sovereign state in recent 
history and Europe’s worst refugee crisis since World War II.12 
Now entering its fifth year, the war in Ukraine continues to cause widespread 
suffering, loss of life, and destruction, putting millions at risk. Mandatory 
evacuations from front-line communities persist, and humanitarian needs 
continue to grow.13 In August and September 2024 alone, an additional 100,000 
12  ARC. 2024. Ukraine Humanitarian Crisis: Two-Year Report. 
13  IRC. 2024. Multisectoral Need Assessment Report.
PAGE  21
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
people were newly displaced.14 As of early 2025, 3.7 million people remain 
internally displaced, with an additional 6.9 million refugees abroad.15 
Continued displacement has deepened poverty risks, strained social support 
systems, and worsened economic instability. Job losses, especially in conflict
affected egions, have further compounded the crisis, with more than a fifth of
pre-war adult workers losing employment. Unemployment is especially acute 
in rural areas, where limited economic opportunities have been a persistent 
challenge. According to a survey of 40,000 respondents conducted by IOM, 39 
percent of people in rural areas report a lack of job opportunities, compared to 28 
percent in major cities.
16 By 2023, an estimated 1.8 million additional people had 
fallen into poverty compared to 2020.17 Without government support, including 
pensions and social assistance for internally displaced people, nearly three million 
more Ukrainians would have been pushed into poverty. These social transfers 
have been a critical lifeline, helping to mitigate the economic impact of the war in 
Ukraine on the most vulnerable populations.
18 In parallel, the psychological toll of 
prolonged war is growing, with 63 percent of households reporting mental health 
challenges due to ongoing uncertainty, violence, and forced displacement.
19 
Attacks by Russian Federation across the country have damaged homes, 
community buildings, and critical infrastructure, leaving residents dependent on 
external aid. Damage is largely concentrated in the frontline oblasts of Donetsk, 
Kharkiv, Kherson, Luhansk, Mykolaiv, Odesa, Sumy, and Zaporizhzhia, as well as in 
areas reclaimed by the Ukrainian Armed Forces.
20 Kyiv oblast has also experienced 
damage from airstrikes and falling debris from destroyed drones.21 While Ukraine 
has reclaimed some of the territory initially occupied, as of February 2025, Russian 
Federation still controls 20 percent of the country’s land. Airstrikes, landmines, 
explosive remnants of war, and ongoing fighting have esulted in over 40,838 
civilian casualties since the full-scale invasion began.
22 In response, Ukraine has 
continued retaliatory drone strikes on Russian military and infrastructure targets. 
Intensified attacks – particularly on inf astructure – are causing widespread 
14  UNICEF. 2024. Ukraine Humanitarian Situation Report No. 47.
15  UNHCR. 2024.  Multi-year strategy 2025-2027.
16  IOM. 2024. Employment, Mobility and Labour Market Dynamics in Ukraine.
17  World Bank. 2024. Listening to citizens of Ukraine: the poverty and human impacts of Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine. 
18  World Bank. 2024. Listening to citizens of Ukraine: the poverty and human impacts of Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine. 
19  OCHA. 2025. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2025. 
20  UNHCR. 2024.  Multi-year strategy 2025-2027. 
21
  
Kyiv School of Economics. 2025. Report on Damages to Infrastructure from the Destruction 
Caused by Russia’s Military Aggression Against Ukraine as of November 2024.
22  UN Human Rights. 2024. Ukraine: Protection of civilians in armed conflict.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  22
damage, especially to the energy sector.23 The cost of direct damage to buildings 
and infrastructure is estimated to be USD 176 billion, while reconstruction and 
recovery needs are estimated at USD 524 – approximately 2.8 times Ukraine’s 
estimated nominal GDP for 2024.
24 More than two million homes were damaged or 
destroyed between February 2022 and February 2024, with new damage occurring 
daily.
25 
Targeted attacks on infrastructure have made repairs increasingly dangerous, and 
workforce shortages due to conscription have delayed critical restoration efforts.
Strikes on energy infrastructure have drastically reduced the country’s power-
generating capacity, disrupting essential services such as water, gas, and heating, 
impacting homes, shelters, schools, and health facilities.
26 
The complexity of the situation is compounded by the recent decision of the 
United States’ 2025 to freeze and/or terminate funding for US foreign aid 
programmes, which will have immediate consequences on humanitarian aid. Since 
January 2022, Ukraine has received approximately  USD 407 billion in international 
military, financial and humanitarian aid – mo e than USD 118 billion of which has 
come from the United States.
27 Of these funds, USAID provided USD 2.6 billion in 
humanitarian aid, USD 5 billion in development assistance, and facilitated
 
more 
than
 
USD 30 billion in direct US budgetary support for Ukraine.28  The suspension 
of funding has disrupted numer
ous ongoing USAID-funded development projects, 
including critical infrastructure reconstruction, power generation procurement, 
and the modernization of railway lines and border crossings with the EU. USAID 
fund cuts will also affect the agricultural sector, as well as NGOs working to combat 
Russian disinformation and monitor human rights and rule of law standards.
29 
Ukrainian Institutional Humanitarian Response
At the national level, following the full-scale invasion, several ministries play a key 
role in humanitarian, development, and rehabilitation efforts in Uk aine. These 
include the Ministry of Reintegration of Temporarily Occupied Territories, the State 
Emergency Service of Ukraine (SESU), the Ministry of Social Policy, the Ministry of 
Health, and the Ministry of Education and Science. These ministries collaborate 
with international organizations, UN agencies, and donors to coordinate response 
efforts, ensuring aid eaches those most in need.
23  UNHCR. 2024. Multi-year strategy 2025-2027. 
24
  
World Bank. 2024. Ukraine - Fourth Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment (RDNA4): February 
2022 - December 2024
25  UNHCR. 2024. Multi-year strategy 2025-2027. 
26  OCHA. 2025. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2025. 
27  Kiel Institute. 2025. Ukraine Support Tracker. 
28  OSW. 2025. The US suspends foreign aid: consequences for Ukraine. 
29  OSW. 2025. The US suspends foreign aid: consequences for Ukraine.
PAGE  23
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
The Ministry of Reintegration of Temporarily Occupied Territories30 leads IDP 
assistance, humanitarian access, and reintegration policies, supporting both 
frontline communities and IDP integration into host areas. SESU is responsible for 
emergency response, evacuations, and disaster relief, ensuring rapid intervention 
in crisis situations.
31 The Ministry of Social Policy manages social assistance 
programs, including cash-based aid for people in vulnerable situations, while 
the Ministry of Health oversees medical care, medicines, vaccinations, and 
the implementation of targeted policies such as those focused on combating 
Tuberculosis and HIV/AIDs. The Ministry of Education and Science ensures 
continuity of learning for displaced children through emergency education 
programs.
Ukraine’s decentralized governance system places significant esponsibility 
for humanitarian response at the regional and local levels. Oblast State 
Administrations (regional governments) coordinate humanitarian efforts within
their jurisdictions, working with national ministries and aid organizations to 
allocate resources. Raion (district) administrations implement regional policies and 
manage aid distribution. At the local level, Hromadas (municipalities) – including 
city councils, village councils, and Starostas (village heads) – play an important role 
in the provision of assistance and management of social services. In rural areas, 
Starostas help identify needs and liaise with humanitarian organizations to ensure 
aid reaches people in vulnerable situations effectivel . Local authorities also 
collaborate with international organizations, CSOs, and NGOs to inform targeting 
strategies and manage logistics for aid distribution.
 
Further supporting this decentr
alized system, 1,319 Administrative Service Centres 
(TSNAPs) operate across the country, providing essential services such as issuing 
certificates (e.g., IDP certificates), ocessing permits, and facilitating registration 
for government assistance programs. In collaboration with UNHCR, multi-service 
protection centres (MSPCs) have been established. These centres were designed 
as ‘one-stop shops’ to help individuals understand their rights, entitlements, and 
available assistance.
32
Corruption
As Ukraine’s humanitarian response relies heavily on decentralized structures 
and partnerships with local authorities and organizations, ensuring accountability 
at all levels is critical. However, Ukraine continues to face challenges related to 
corruption. According to Transparency International’s 2023 Corruption Perceptions 
Index, Ukraine scored 36 out of 100, ranking 104th out of 180 countries, reflecting
30  Ministry of national unity of Ukraine. N.d. Mission and tasks of the Ministry of Reintegration.
31  The State Emergency Service of Ukraine. N.d. Tasks.
32  Ukraine is Home. N.d. Multi-service protection centres and TSNAPs.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  24
gradual improvement but continued vulnerability in governance and public service 
delivery.33
A 2024 survey by the Center for International Private Enterprise’s Anti-Corruption 
and Governance Center, which examined corruption in humanitarian aid in 
Ukraine, found that 13 percent of organizations had encountered bribery in the 
past two years.
34 Bribe requests most frequently came from local government 
officials, customs authorities, and the police. When oblems with local 
authorities arose, complaints were typically brought to local councils or oblast 
state administrations; other issues were reported to the police or the Bureau of 
Economic Security of Ukraine.
Although 84 percent of surveyed organizations said they would be willing to report 
corruption or fraud, only 72 percent knew where or how to do so. Many chose not 
to use formal reporting channels, despite those who did generally being satisfied
with the outcomes. Instead, it was more common for individuals to share their 
experiences on social media. This reluctance to report formally was often tied to 
the lack of clear internal procedures or the poor enforcement of existing ones.
35
Some organizations have anti-corruption policies, usually because they were 
already working with—or hoping to work with—international NGOs, donors, or 
humanitarian partners that require them. Still, the overall picture points to serious 
gaps: two-thirds of organizations did not have a standalone integrity or anti-
corruption policy, and nearly three-quarters had no dedicated staff focused on
preventing or addressing corruption.had no dedicated staff focused on p eventing 
or addressing corruption.
Humanitarian context
According to Ukraine’s 2025 Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan, 12.7 
million people in Ukraine are in need of assistance. Among them, 45 percent are 
women, 30 percent are older people, 15 percent are children, and 14 percent have 
disabilities.
36 
The full-scale invasion had an adverse impact on housing, land, and property 
issues, leaving many without stable living conditions. Key challenges include 
damaged or destroyed homes in both occupied and non-occupied areas and 
restricted access to housing due to ongoing hostilities.
37 As such, there is a 
33  Transparency International. 2024. Corruption Perceptions Index: Ukraine.
34
  
Center for International Private Enterprise. 2024. Corruption Risk Assessment: Humanitarian Aid 
in Ukraine. (n= 100 humanitarian aid organizations in Ukraine)
35  Center for International Private Enterprise. 2024. Corruption Risk Assessment: Humanitarian Aid 
in Ukraine. (n= 100 humanitarian aid organizations in Ukraine)
36  OCHA. 2025. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2025. 
37  IOM. 2025. Housing, Land, and Property in Ukraine.
PAGE  25
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
significant need for legal support and guidance, particularly for displaced
individuals and those who have lost their homes or property due to shelling or 
forced displacement. In addition to securing shelter, many require assistance in 
navigating government support programs, accessing compensation, and securing 
legal aid.
38
Many people living in frontline oblasts have evacuated to safer areas since the 
start of the full-scale invasion in 2022, with a mix of intra-oblast and inter-oblast 
displacement patterns.
39 According to 2022 report, 72 percent of internally 
displaced people relocated to a diffe ent oblast from their place of residence, 
27 percent remained within their oblast of origin.
40 The highest inter-oblast 
displacement movements were recorded from Donetsk to Dnipropetrovsk oblasts 
(269,000 internally displaced people) and from Donetsk oblast to Kyiv city (117,000 
internally displaced people).
41 Certain oblasts, particularly Kherson, Donetsk, and 
Kharkiv, saw high rates of intra-oblast displacement.42 Kharkiv Oblast (366,000 
internally displaced people) and Zaporizhzhia Oblast (176,000 internally displaced 
people) continue to have a significant concent ation of displaced people, as many 
prefer to stay close to their areas of origin.
43 Eastern Kharkiv and Dnipropetrovsk 
oblasts, in particular, have become key hubs for displaced people.44 However, 
increasing Russian Federation incursions are triggering new evacuations, which 
could push displacement further westward. This trend is particularly concerning 
for older individuals, who are more likely to choose intra-oblast displacement over 
relocating to a diffe ent region.
45
Some internally displaced people reside in collective sites set up by Ukrainian 
authorities in repurposed public buildings such as dormitories, schools, and health 
facilities. These sites were not designed for long-term habitation and frequently 
lack essential infrastructure, including accessible water, sanitation, and hygiene 
(WASH) facilities and functioning bomb shelters. As of mid-2024, approximately 
79,000 displaced people with complex needs were residing in nearly 1,800 
collective sites across 24 oblasts, representing about 2 percent of all internally 
displaced people.
46 Many residents are long-term displaced, with 79 percent 
having stayed for over 17 months, while an increasing number of sites (46 percent) 
continue to receive new arrivals, including evacuees. The demand for transit 
38  Ibid
39  IOM. 2024. Ukraine internal displacement report, general population survey. 
40  Ibid
41  Ibid
42  Ibid
43  Ibid 
44  Ibid 
45  Ibid 
46  OCHA. 2025. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2025.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  26
centres has also risen, with over 25,000 evacuees passing through these temporary 
accommodation hubs in 2024.47 Looking ahead to 2025, an estimated 149,000 
internally displaced people in collective sites will require Camp Coordination and 
Camp Management (CCCM) services, which include the provision of essential 
items, basic repairs, and maintenance to ensure minimum living standards .
48
Frontline areas
The shifting frontline continues to impact oblasts such as Dnipropetrovsk, Donetsk, 
Kharkiv, Kherson, Mykolaiv, and Zaporizhzhia.49 These areas continue to experience 
intense hostilities, leaving residents increasingly vulnerable. In 2024, humanitarian 
needs reached extreme and catastrophic levels, with over 3.3 million people in the 
east and south requiring assistance.
50
Security concerns, limited access to social services, housing, land, and property 
issues, legal assistance needs, and child separation are among the most pressing 
challenges in the northeast and south where the war remains most intense.
51 
Widespread destruction of civilian and critical infrastructure has heightened 
protection and shelter needs, with many bomb shelters inaccessible to people 
with disabilities.
52 In frontline areas, specialized medical services are scarce, and 
transporting those in need to larger cities, where such services are available, 
becomes especially difficult during the winter month
53 
Security risks near the frontlines significantly complicate aid deliver , as 
humanitarian workers are exposed to ongoing hostilities, including airstrikes, 
drone attacks, and targeted violence against aid personnel and facilities.
54 The 
destruction of critical infrastructure, such as roads, storage facilities, and power 
grids, further hampers aid distribution, making it difficult to ansport and store 
supplies.
55 Additionally, newly introduced permit systems in some frontline oblasts, 
such as Kherson and Donetsk, add bureaucratic difficulties, delaying assistance t
those in urgent need.
56 With winter exacerbating these challenges through power 
outages and harsh weather conditions, humanitarian operations remain severely 
constrained, forcing organizations to rely on local volunteers and authorities for 
47  Ibid
48  Ibid
49  Ibid
50  OCHA. 2024. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2024. 
51
  
United Nations Human Rights. 2025. The impact of the armed conflict and occupation on 
children’s rights in Ukraine.; IOM. 2025. Housing, Land, and Property in Ukraine.; OCHA. 2025. Ukraine 
Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2025. 
52  OCHA. 2025. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2025. 
53  WHO. 2024. Factsheet access to health services in Ukraine frontline oblasts (2023-2024).
54  OCHA. 2025. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2025. 
55  Ibid
56
  
Ibid
PAGE  27
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
last-mile deliveries in high-risk areas.57
Individuals who remain near the contact line face compounded challenges, as 
damaged infrastructure, market disruptions, and financial ha dships limit access 
to food, water, and other essential services.
58 In areas where markets are non-
functional, in-kind aid is provided to ensure access to essential goods. However, 
as this aid is standardized, it may not fully meet the diverse needs of the affected
population.
59 
As frontline conditions deteriorate, many individuals seek relocation. However, 
without adequate protection, their vulnerability increases. Economic constraints 
drive some people, including single female-headed households, people with 
disabilities, and older people, to remain in or return to frontline areas after 
evacuating, as they cannot affo d to live as internally displaced people in safer 
regions.
60 According to a survey of returnees to frontline areas, 27 percent 
resettled in their original settlements or oblasts, while five pe cent are living in 
areas experiencing active hostilities.
61 While family reunification and access to
employment were the primary reasons for return, many continue to face serious 
challenges due to economic insecurity and damaged or inadequate infrastructure.
62 
To address this, NGOs are advocating for a stronger humanitarian response in 
safer oblasts to encourage displaced people to remain there rather than returning 
to high-risk areas.
63
In April 2024, new legislation lowered the mobilization age from 27 to 25, 
increasing the number of civilians eligible for conscription.
64 This has intensified
recruitment efforts, including aids on public spaces. 65 While intended to bolster 
defence efforts, these changes have int oduced new protection concerns and 
stressors among the civilian population. Upon return some  soldiers experience 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and other mental health struggles, which, in 
some cases, have led to incidents of GBV.
66 
57  Ibid
58  OCHA. 2025. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2025.
59
  
Ibid
60
  
IMPACT. 2024. Unsafe returns: what makes refugees return to Ukraine and settle in the frontline 
areas of the country?
61
  
Ibid
62  Ibid
63  KII 16, cluster staff
64  AP News. 2024. Ukraine Lowers its conscription age to 25 to replenish its beleaguered troops. 
65
  
Euronews. 2024. Recruiters raid Kyiv venues in search of Ukrainians not registered for 
conscription. 
66  CARE International. 2023. Rapid Gender Analysis: Ukraine
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  28
A shift in humanitarian priorities
Since Russian Federation launched its full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 
2022, the humanitarian response has developed into a large-scale, highly 
coordinated effort that continues to adapt to the evolving needs on the ground. 
The initial focus was on emergency relief, addressing mass displacement, food 
insecurity, and urgent healthcare needs.
67 This phase then rapidly scaled up under 
the UN’s Level 3 emergency designation—its highest classification—which enabled 
the swift mobilization of international resources and personnel.
68 
In 2023, the response began shifting from emergency relief toward resilience-
building, particularly in regions facing long-term displacement and the breakdown 
of essential services, infrastructure, and local governance systems due to the 
prolonged impact of the war.
69 Humanitarian assistance became increasingly 
concentrated in frontline and war-affected oblasts, focusing on those directly 
impacted by the war, as well as transit hubs, collective sites, and temporary 
shelters.
70 Meanwhile, other regions are shifting toward development-focused 
interventions, with support from International Organizations (IOs) moving 
away from direct humanitarian aid toward repairs, legal aid, and psychological 
support services.
71 In 2025, In response to funding reduction, and in line with 
the Emergency Relief Coordinator’s call for a ‘Humanitarian Reset,’ and under 
the guidance of the Humanitarian Coordinator, the humanitarian community in 
Ukraine has undertaken a principled, evidence-based reprioritization of the 2025 
Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan (HNRP). The process was informed by 
severity data, updated needs assessments, partners presence, and consultations 
with humanitarian actors. The revised response is now structured around four 
strategic priorities: 
•
Supporting the most vulnerable who r
emain close to the front line
• Evacuations
• Emergency r
esponse after strikes
• Humanitarian contributions to the most vulnerable among the IDPs including
those in collective centers.
To safeguar
d life-saving operations, activities not directly contributing to the four 
core priorities have been deprioritized, particularly in areas of lower severity or 
67  OCHA. 2022. Ukraine – Humanitarian Response Plan 2022.
68  Inter-Agency Standing Committee. 2022. System-wide scale up protocols activated for the 
Ukraine response. 
69  OCHA. 2024. Ukr
aine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2024. 
70  KII 15, INGO staff; KII 18, IO staff
71  KII 12, IO staff
PAGE  29
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
where government capacity is stronger. However, these activities remain part of 
the HNRP and will continue to be monitored72.
This evolution in strategy has occurred alongside growing concerns over donor 
fatigue and anticipated funding gaps, which are compelling humanitarian 
organizations to scale down their operations. This is prompting a shift toward 
sustainability strategies, including the delegation of certain services to the 
Ukrainian government and civil society actors. While these adaptations aim to 
safeguard core humanitarian functions, they also raise questions about the long-
term viability of aid delivery, especially as the war in Ukraine prolongs and needs 
continue to persist .
73
So far, participation and leadership in coordination structures have shown uneven 
progress. While local and national NGOs increasingly participate in coordination 
forums, particularly at sub-national levels, Ukrainian actors still have limited 
opportunities for meaningful leadership and influence ver decision-making. This 
includes limited authority to shape priorities, co-design interventions, or allocating 
resources. Despite their significant ope ational contributions – often implementing 
more than half of program activities – local organizations continue to be seen 
primarily as implementing partners rather than strategic co-leaders. Structural 
barriers such as lack of funding for cluster participation, language limitations, and 
inadequate inclusion in strategic planning continue to hinder the advancement of 
a truly localized humanitarian response.
74 
Interviews with Internation Organisations representatives describe this shift as a 
strategic response to funding constraints. However, it has raised concerns about 
people in vulnerable situations in western and central Ukraine, where assistance 
– whether food, non-food items, or cash-based interventions – remains vital.
75 IO 
actors have emphasized that the transition away from these regions must be 
handled carefully to prevent disruptions in support for those still in need.
As humanitarian organizations prepare to scale down operations, cluster 
representatives have raised concerns that Ukraine’s social security system may 
not be fully prepared to take over.
76 This is largely due to a shortage of qualified
personnel, particularly in social services, and the destruction of essential facilities 
caused by missile strikes.
77 These challenges have severely strained service 
delivery, making it increasingly difficult to ovide consistent support to affected
72  OCHA, Ukraine HNRP 2025 (April)
73  SwissInfo. 2024. Donor fatigue looms over humanitarian aid in Ukraine after two years of war. 
74  Refugees International. 2024. Annual Ukraine Localization Survey 2024.
75  KII 17, cluster staff
76  KII 18, IO staff
77  Kyiv School of Economics. 2024. Report on damages to infrastructure from the destruction 
caused by Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  30
communities.78 
Despite these challenges, IOs continue to collaborate with national and local 
authorities, coordinating efforts and pooling esources to sustain aid delivery 
wherever possible.
79 However, local NGOs worry that cross-cutting aspects of 
humanitarian work – such as gender equality, accountability to affected people,
the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, and disability inclusion – may be 
deprioritized due to limited capacity and competing state priorities.
80 
78  KII 13, cluster staff
79  KII 3, local NGO staff
80  KII 20, working gr oup staff
PAGE  31
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Methodo-
logy
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  32
METHODOLOGY
Analytical Framework
The analytical framework was designed with the goal of establishing an in-depth 
understanding of the Ukrainian context by examining key components such as 
demographics, access to and provision of basic services, economy and livelihoods, 
community structure, participation in assistance provision, conflict dynamics, socio-
cultural issues, protection risks, and accountability of humanitarian actors. This 
contextual understanding helped identify and evaluate the risks and vulnerabilities 
faced by diffe ent communities and informed the development of mitigation 
strategies, ensuring that future interventions are both appropriate and inclusive. 
{The full analytical framework with indicators measuring each subcomponent is 
included in Annex A of the report}
Data Collection 
To implement the I-CARA, three modes of data collection were employed: 1) desk 
review, 2) key informant interviews (KII), and 3) focus group discussions (FGD). 
Data collection was conducted between 8 October and 20 November 2024 and 
analysed using Atlas.ti and Excel. General scientific research methods were applied, 
including generalization, analysis and synthesis, and comparison. Throughout the 
data collection phase, Voluntas and InfoSapience adhered to the principles of do no 
harm, conflict sensitivity, informed consent and anonymity, and gender sensitivity, 
ensuring safe and inclusive participation across gender groups.
Desk Review 
A comprehensive desk review was conducted to enhance the understanding of 
the I-CARA framework and the broader Ukrainian context. It focused on key topics 
such as gender, disability, inclusion, conflict dynamics, and factors driving food
security. The review helped shape the analytical framework and supported the 
triangulation of data collected through the various primary research methods. {For 
a full list of reviewed documents and sources, see Annex B}
Key Informant Interviews (KIIs)
Voluntas and Info Sapiens conducted 20 KIIs, all held remotely via Zoom or phone. 
Two KIIs included two participants, bringing the total number of interviewees to 22. 
Among them were 16 women and 6 men representing local NGOs, UN agencies, 
and government officials. The interv wees and the groups they represent were 
identified in consultation with the WFP team, who also p ovided the contact
PAGE  33
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
information. The KII guides were tailored to each group, though similar themes 
were explored across all interviews. 
Of the KIIs, five we e conducted with representatives of local NGOs supporting 
people with disabilities, Roma communities, LGBTQIA+ individuals, survivors of 
gender-based violence (GBV), people living with HIV/AIDS, and internally displaced 
people. Two interviews were conducted with WFP partner NGOs. Ten interviews 
were conducted with staff f om CARE, IMPACT, UNHCR, UNFPA, UNAIDS, WFP , and 
two Food Security and Livelihoods (FSL) cluster coordinators from FAO and WFP . 
Lastly, three interviews collected insights from local government official
Focus Group Discussions (FGDs)
Voluntas and Info Sapiens conducted 40 FGDs with key populations, including 
women, men, older people, internally displaced people, people with disabilities, 
the Roma community, people living with HIV/AIDS, and members of the LGBTQIA+ 
community. FGDs were conducted with the diffe ent groups to better understand 
the challenges, needs, and preferences of various population groups. Each FGD 
included 6 to 7 participants, which allowed for a productive discussion where 
everyone had space to share their views. In total, 249 individuals participated in 
the FGDs divided across the groups as follows:
Group Sample Group Sample
Men (18-59) 44 People with disabilities 13
Women (18-59) 49 Roma community 13
Older men (59+) 50 LGBTQIA+ 6
Older women (59+) 43 People living with HIV/AIDs 6
IDPs 25
Participants were selected through a combination of approaches. Those from 
vulnerable groups (e.g. people with disabilities, people living with HIV/AIDS, 
LGBTQIA+ individuals) were recruited through NGOs that work closely with these 
communities. Older people, as well as adult men and women, were recruited 
through Info Sapiens’ local teams. In some cases, WFP representatives supported 
recruitment by sharing contact information of local activists who were able to 
assist in reaching participants. 
In line with WFP guidelines, Voluntas and Info Sapiens aimed to maintain a 
balanced mix of participants who had received WFP assistance and those who had 
not across all FGDs. Overall, 148 participants were recipients of WFP assistance 
and 101 were not. To reduce the risk of response bias, the consent form used 
prior to data collection clearly stated that participation in the discussions would 
not result in any additional assistance nor would it impact any assistance they 
currently receive. Those who had received WFP assistance were recruited with the
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  34
help of local WFP representatives and partners. All participants were screened 
using a standardized questionnaire to ensure they met the parameters of the 
group.
The 40 FGDs were held across eleven Oblasts: Dnipropetrovsk, Donetsk, Kharkiv, 
Kherson, Kyiv, Lviv, Mykolaiv, Odesa, Sumy, Vinnytsia, and Zaporizhzhia, with nine 
target groups. The figu e below shows the number of FGDs carried out in each 
oblast and the distribution across the diffe ent groups. {For a detailed breakdown 
of FGDs per oblast, please refer to Annex B}
Figure 3: Number of FGDs (per area and target audience)
Of the 40 FGDs, 22 were conducted in person and 18 remotely. To maintain 
fl xibility and adaptability, modifications we e made in collaboration with WFP 
during data collection in response to security concerns or sensitivities. Below is an 
overview of the adjustments made by Oblast:
•
 Kharkiv: : FGDs initially planned as r
emote sessions were conducted in 
person, as the situation was deemed sufficiently safe, and equent power 
outages made remote sessions challenging. 
•
 Zaporizhzhia: FGDs originally planned as in-person sessions wer
e held 
remotely due to the worsening security situation. 
•
 Myk
olaiv: The FGD with HIV/AIDS participants was conducted in Mykolaiv, 
where the strong network and active presence of the local partner, Alliance 
Global, facilitated participation. The FGD was held remotely for participant 
safety and confidentialit . 
•
 Kherson: 
FGDs were conducted remotely as planned, except for one session
PAGE  35
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
with the Roma community, which was held in person to better accommodate 
the need of the target audience.
•
 Dnipr
opetrovsk: FGDs were conducted in person as planned in Dnipro, with 
local partners bringing beneficiaries f om Nikopol, Kryvyi Rih, and Synelnykove. 
However, one FGD with the Roma community was moved to a remote format 
to accommodate their desire for privacy and convenience.
•
 Kyiv: 
Three FGDs were conducted in person as planned, while one, with the 
LGBTQIA+ community, was held remotely to accommodate sensitivities, as 
participants preferred not to meet in person.
•
 Sumy
, Vinnytsia and Kyiv: No WFP beneficiaries we e invited to the FGDs 
as local partners reported having no available contacts. Instead, individuals 
receiving assistance from other organizations, as well as non-beneficiaries,
were invited to participate.
•
 Dnipr
opetrovsk and Kherson: Identifying a sufficient number of Rom
community members proved challenging and required additional support from 
WFP managers and local partners to ensure enough participants were invited.
•
 Odesa: An FGD with women aged 59+ was planned with a fifty-fifty spli
between WFP and non-WFP beneficiaries. As the
e were no WFP beneficiaries
in this age group in Odesa, the session was conducted with recipients of other 
aid programs and non-beneficiarie .
Figure 4: Distribution of FGDs (Online/In person)
FGDs in blue were 
conducted in person
FGDs in orange were 
carried out online
Donetsk
Sumy
Zaporizhzhia
MykolaivOdesa
Vinnytsia
Lviv
Kharkiv
Kyiv
Dnipropetrovsk​
Kherson​
● ● ● ● ●
● ● ●
● ● ● ●
● ●
● ● ● ●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
● ● ● ●
● ● ●
● ● ●
● ● ● ●
● ● ●
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  36
Challenges and Limitations 
Several challenges and limitations affected the scope of this study and the data
collected. As such, the following factors should be taken into account when 
interpreting the findings p esented in this report
Scope of qualitative findings
This study used qualitative methods to explore the perspectives of selected 
participants. While these insights offer depth and cont xtual understanding, 
qualitative findings a e not intended to be statistically generalizable to the broader 
population. As such, they reflect the specific xperiences of those consulted and 
should be interpreted as indicative rather than representative. To strengthen the 
reliability of the analysis, findings we e triangulated across multiple sources and 
respondent groups.
Limited geographic scope
Data collection was conducted in 11 out of 24 oblasts in Ukraine, limiting nationwide 
representativity and generalizability. These oblasts were selected by WFP based on 
programmatic priorities. Additionally, only one FGD was conducted per group in 
each oblast, reducing the diversity of perspectives captured within each oblast, and 
providing limited opportunities for triangulation.
Limitations of remotely-led FGDs
Due to security concerns, FGDs were conducted remotely in five of the el ven 
target oblasts. Three of these oblasts are located on the frontline, while the 
remaining two are subject to ongoing hostilities. While remote FGDs were 
necessary, challenges related to limited digital literacy were encountered during 
the FGD with Roma community members. To address this, participants with low 
digital literacy were brought together in one location, where researchers assisted 
them in connecting to the remote session
Low representation of hard-to-reach respondents
Unlike men, women, and older people, who participated in FGDs across all oblasts, 
FGDs with people in vulnerable situations – including internally displaced people, 
people living with HIV/AIDS, people with disabilities, LGBTQIA+ individuals, and the 
Roma community – were not conducted in every oblast. As a result, findings related 
to these groups may not be fully representative of each group’s perspectives and 
experiences.
PAGE  37
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Inherent research biases
Assessing the needs of people in vulnerable situations can be prone to certain 
potential cognitive and research biases, which are key to consider in interpreting 
the  findings
  
•
 Social desir
ability bias. Respondents may sometimes provide answers 
they believe are more socially acceptable, which can influence the accu acy 
of findings. While this was not a widesp ead issue across most focus 
group discussions, it was noted during the FGD with Roma participants, 
where some individuals frequently looked to community leaders or older 
neighbours for validation while responding.
•
 Cognitive dissonance bias. Respondents may e
xperience discomfort 
when acknowledging negative aspects of their experience in their 
community and country. They may downplay or rationalize these aspects 
and how they perceive them to resolve this discomfort.
 
•
 Confirmation bias. Given the ongoing conflict and tensions, the
e was a 
risk that respondents sought out information that aligns with their existing 
beliefs or the predominant views of the group they identify with. This can 
lead to confirmation bias in their esponses.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  38
Lessons from Adapting the I-CARA Framework to the 
Ukrainian context
The I-CARA framework includes a set of qualitative questions designed for 
implementation across various contexts. To align with the Ukrainian context and 
the stakeholders involved in data collection, a subset of these questions was 
selected. These questions were drawn from various question menus, including 
risk assessment, socio-cultural and gender norms, exclusionary practices, AAP , and 
stakeholder analysis. To ensure relevance and sensitivity to the local context and 
target communities, some questions were refined and ephrased.
One key takeaway from this process is that to better assess community-level 
dynamics, particularly in local communities, general qualitative questions, such as 
ones assessing access to diffe ent basic needs and services, should be adapted 
into a quantitative format and used in a community-wide survey with a larger 
sample. This would make the findings mo e representative while also being a 
cost-effective app oach. A survey would also help address several challenges 
and limitations outlined earlier: it reduces research bias, eliminates the need for 
in-person participation, and allows for broader inclusion of people in vulnerable 
situations. To account for digital literacy issues, surveys could also be conducted by 
telephone (phone call) or in person.
A survey of this kind could provide a foundation for designing data collection tools, 
with FGDs then used to add depth and nuance to the findings. This app oach was 
partially implemented in this study by converting the AAP section of the FGD guide 
into a short telephone survey conducted during participant recruitment, helping to 
shorten the length of FGDs.
PAGE  39
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Main 
Findings
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  40
MAIN FINDINGS
The following sections presen t findings according to the analytical framework, 
covering service delivery and assistance, economy and livelihoods, community 
structure and participation, con flict dynamics, socio-cultural and gender norms, 
protection risks, and the accountability of humanitarian actors. It begins with an 
overview of cross-cutting communit y findings that are common across all groups 
involved in data collection. This is followed by a detailed analysis of community-
specific findings, with dedicated sections for each group, including adult women 
and men, older people, the Roma community, people with disabilities, internally 
displaced people, LGBTQIA+, and people living with HIV/AIDs.
Cross-cutting community findings 
Food and basic service delivery and assistance
Across all population groups assessed in Ukraine as part of this study, the most 
pressing needs include healthcare, utilities, financial stabilit , food security, 
housing, and education. Access to these services is becoming increasingly strained 
due to economic instability, ongoing conflict, displacement, and inf astructural 
damage.
81
Healthcare 
Healthcare remains one of the most urgent needs, with long waiting times to see 
a doctor and a shortage of specialists creating significant barriers to accessing
necessary treatment. Private healthcare, often considered an alternative to the 
state-funded system, is unaffo dable for people in vulnerable situations – such 
as older adults, people with disabilities, and internally displaced people – due to 
its high cost. These barriers to healthcare access disproportionately affect those
with greater and more frequent healthcare needs, including LGBTQIA+ individuals, 
people living with HIV (PLHIV), older people, and people with disabilities. 
Government clinics are overburdened, particularly in smaller towns, forcing many 
to travel long distances for treatment. In some parts of Donetsk oblast, damaged 
hospital infrastructure has left mobile clinics as the only option,
82 while in Mykolaiv 
oblast, humanitarian organizations like the Red Cross provide occasional free 
medical services, though coverage remains inconsistent. Bureaucratic obstacles, 
such as the requirement to register with family doctors, make it more difficult fo
internally displaced people to access healthcare. As a result, they often have to 
81  IOM. 2025.  IOM Aims to Aid Two Million People in Ukraine in 2025 as War and Displacement 
Continue.
82  FGD 1, with women (18-59), Donetsk oblast
PAGE  41
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
visit multiple institutions before being admitted for treatment.83 
Utilities, Heating, and Water
The cost and availability of utilities, including electricity, heating, and clean water, 
are major concerns. Frequent power outages disrupt daily life, making it difficul
for people to maintain essential heating and cooking systems. Pensions and wages 
have not kept pace with rising utility costs, forcing many families to prioritize 
food and utilities over other basic needs. In Dnipropetrovsk oblast, high electricity 
prices and damaged infrastructure – such as destroyed municipal heating plants, 
compromised power lines, and non-functional heating plants – have forced 
residents to turn to alternative heating sources. Although gas remains common, 
supply disruptions have led many to prioritize wood and briquettes, which they 
either collect themselves or receive through assistance. In areas where central 
heating systems are not functional, residents must use solid fuels like fi ewood.
Access to safe and reliable water varies widely across the diffe ent oblasts. In 
Vinnytsia oblast, residents depend on wells, but the water is often undrinkable 
due to high sediment levels. In regions affected y active hostilities, tap water 
shortages can last for days. In Donetsk oblast, daily water output has dropped 
from 280,000 cubic meters in 2021 to an average of just 120,000 cubic meters. 
As a result, residents now rely on irregular water deliveries, leaving many without 
a stable supply.
84 Despite a 32 percent national increase in water tariffs in June
2023,85 some respondents reported that water quality remains poor, forcing many 
households to purchase bottled water or travel long distances to collect bottled 
water from water distribution points, this is particularly adds more problems to 
persons with disabilities or older people, whose access to water could depend on 
the generosity of others.
 
Food Security
As reported by FGD participants across the diffe ent community groups, while 
food is available, affo dability has increasingly become a challenge. Physical access 
to food is also a concern, particularly for people living in regions affected y active 
hostilities. Many households, particularly those headed by women or marginalized 
groups of people like the Roma community, struggle to affo d basic food items. 
As a result, 59 percent of female-headed households purchase cheaper, often 
less nutritious, food – compared to 50 percent of male-headed households.
86 
Furthermore, 16 percent of female-headed households reported restricting their 
83  FGD 24, with IDPs, Mykolaiv oblast
84  Antikor. 2024. In the occupied Donetsk, water supplies delivered to the city have halved.
85  Ukrainian News. 2023. Water Tariffs Rising in Ukraine: What Will Be the New Prices from July 1?
86  REACH. 2023. Multisectoral Needs Assessment (MSNA) – Gender Focus Brief (March 2023). 
(n=13,449 households)
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  42
own food intake so that small children could eat, compared to 9 percent of male-
headed households. This reflects the heightened vulne ability of female-headed 
households, who are more likely to be sole caregivers of children.
87
Findings from the latest Joint Food Security and Livelihood Assessment (JFSLA) 
confirm these t ends. The assessment revealed that food insecurity affects
between one-fifth and one-thi d of households in frontline and bordering oblasts, 
with Donetska and Zaporizka oblasts among the most affected
88 Approximately 
38 percent of households surveyed reported food as their most urgent need in the 
coming six months. Households near the frontlines face severe access constraints 
due to disrupted supply chains, displacement, and active hostilities, which 
compound affo dability issues and reduce the availability of fresh and protein-rich 
foods. Meat, along with fruits and vegetables, was particularly out of reach for 
many families, especially displaced households and those with low incomes.
89
In response to food insecurity, some families turn to self-production, such as 
small-scale gardening or raising poultry. This enables them to offset mar et price 
fluctuations and, in some cases, earn income y selling surplus produce.
90 Others 
reported taking on part-time jobs to supplement their income and ensure that 
they can affo d food alongside other expenses.  Some also rely on local barter 
systems, trading homemade goods for essentials like food and hygiene products.
91
Concerns regarding the quality and appropriateness of food assistance were 
highlighted by FGD participants. Some reported that poor storage conditions 
occasionally lead to receiving spoiled goods, while others said they had been given 
items close to their expiry date. For individuals with specific dietary needs—such
as those managing diabetes, heart disease, or other chronic illnesses—receiving 
generic food assistance that does not align with their dietary needs can sometimes 
pose serious health risks. Participants emphasized that high-sugar, high-fat, or 
heavily processed foods sometimes included in aid distributions are unsuitable for 
people with chronic conditions or dietary restrictions and hence fail to meet their 
needs. As highlighted by a Zaporizhzhia oblast resident, some aid packages include 
products such as pork fat, which may be inappropriate for older people or people 
with health restrictions. Ensuring that food assistance is both safe and appropriate 
is therefore critical for public health and for effectively supporting those in need
92 
87  REACH. 2023. Multisectoral Needs Assessment (MSNA) – Gender Focus Brief (March 2023). 
(n=13,449 households)
88  WFP , FAO and KSE. 2025. Joint Food Security and Livelihood Assessment of Frontline and 
Bordering Regions in Ukraine. (sample: 10,419 households)
89  FGD 36, with older men (60+), Lviv oblast
90  WFP , FAO and KSE. 2025. Joint Food Security and Livelihood Assessment of Frontline and 
Bordering Regions in Ukraine. (sample: 10,419 households)
91  FGD 5, with women (18-59), Kharkiv oblast
92  FGD 19, with older men (60+), Zaporizhzhia oblast
PAGE  43
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
The Joint Food Security and Livelihood Assessment of Frontline and Bordering 
Regions in Ukraine also found that the household food security level was a 
concern, especially for households with vulnerable members like persons with 
disabilities or more than three children, highlighting the need for more tailored 
assistance to support them.
93 
Education Barriers
Since the start of the war in Ukraine, access to education has become a major 
challenge, particularly for children in regions affected y active hostilities. Many 
schools have been destroyed, forcing students to rely on remote learning, which 
is ineffective in a eas with unstable internet. Frequent power outages further 
disrupt remote education, making consistent learning impossible for many 
students.
94 Children with disabilities are particularly affected y the shift to online 
education, as they require specialized attention that is difficult to ovide remotely. 
In frontline oblasts, many children have not attended in-person school since 2022, 
leaving families deeply concerned about the long-term educational impact of the 
war.
95
Economy and livelihoods
Despite the war’s impact on the economy, some industries and businesses have 
relocated to safer areas. Sectors such as manufacturing, social services, the food 
industry, education, trade, and municipal jobs continue to provide employment 
opportunities.
96 However, the departure of many men to the front lines while 
others are trying to evade military service has created significant workfo ce 
shortages, which cannot be fully compensated for by the rest of the population.
Our city has now received new trolleybuses. But there is 
no one to work on them. There are young people who could 
work, but they are simply hiding. They will not even go 
there to that trolleybus park or bus, because they will be 
taken to the recruitment centre.
FGD 23, with older men (60+), Mykolaiv oblast
At the same time, strict formal education requirements for certain roles pose 
additional barriers to employment, even for individuals with relevant experience.
93  WFP , FAO and KSE. 2025. Joint Food Security and Livelihood Assessment of Frontline and 
Bordering Regions in Ukraine. (sample: 10,419 households)
94  United Nations Ukraine. 2023. Attacks on Ukraine’s Electricity Infrastructure Threaten Key Aspects 
of Life as Winter Approaches.
95  Save the Children. 2024. Attacks on Education in Ukraine Double in 2024, Leaving Some Parents 
Terrified to Send Their Children to School.
96  IOM. 2024. Employment, Mobility and Labour Market Dynamics in Ukraine.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  44
For example, in our community, we need an accountant. 
But we need a person with higher education. I have an 
accountant’s profession, but I graduated from a technical 
school, and I do not have a higher education.
FGD 26, with women (18-59), Mykolaiv oblast
Job opportunities are largely concentrated in cities, making it difficult for peopl
in rural areas to find empl yment. This challenge is further compounded by 
inadequate public transportation and security concerns, which make commuting 
more difficul
 97 
Even the free bus that was supposed to take people to 
Sloviansk every Tuesday has been cancelled. It costs 
one hundred and fifty hryvnias to travel twenty-five 
kilometres. Some people don’t have that kind of money.
FGD 2, with men (18-59), Donetsk oblast
Beyond these limitations, middle-aged people who have not yet reached 
retirement age face particular obstacles. Employers often hesitate to hire 
individuals over 50 for skilled positions with stable wages, citing concerns about 
their health and the relevance of their experience.
98 
When government and humanitarian aid fall short, communities rely on social 
capital, which includes support from friends, neighbours, or extended family. For 
some participants, stable remittances – mainly from family members and, in rarer 
cases, friends abroad help cover urgent expenses like utilities and food; for others, 
remittances arrive sporadically, if at all. Some reported relying on an array of 
coping mechanisms, including selling personal belongings and drawing on savings. 
To build resilience, participants expressed a strong need for capacity building 
and reskilling opportunities, such as IT training, financial lite acy programs, and 
vocational courses (e.g., sewing, hairdressing). These initiatives not only bolster 
household income but also foster entrepreneurship – particularly where business 
development funds or reduced bureaucratic barriers enable small enterprises to 
flourish
97  FGD 2, with men (18-59), Donetsk oblast
98  KII 3, local NGO
PAGE  45
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Social cohesion 
 Across much of Ukraine, social cohesion has fluctuated between moments
of tension and solidarity, yet overall, mutual support has grown stronger as 
communities navigate the effects of war
99 This communal sense of solidarity also 
extends to members of the LGBTQIA+ and PLHIV communities, whose experiences 
are generally shaped by everyday social interactions rather than being solely 
defined y their sexual orientation, gender identity, or health status. However, 
individuals whose sexual orientation, gender identity, or HIV status is not publicly 
known still voice concerns about potential stigma if their identity or status 
becomes public.
100 
In many places, residents collaborate to clear debris after air attacks, repair 
windows, and help those unable to evacuate. Crisis situations – such as sudden 
shelling or changes in curfew – often prompt collective actions aimed at preserving 
stability and safety. In oblasts affected y shelling, for example, people noted 
joint efforts to clean basements, install hand ails, and establish informal shelters. 
Residents of smaller towns tend to experience greater trust among neighbors, 
while those in larger cities and more diverse urban areas sometimes see more 
distant relationships.
While social unity in Ukraine has generally increased during the war, there have 
been challenges.
101 Some participants across the diffe ent oblasts expressed 
unease about displaced people settling in their neighborhoods, citing discomfort 
with newcomers and apprehensions about potential informants who could share 
sensitive information with hostile parties or authorities. Fears of information 
misuse lead many to avoid discussing sensitive topics openly. Tensions between 
host communities and displaced people often arise due to diffe ences in political 
views, religious beliefs, and language.
102 In the initial stages of displacement, some 
displaced people faced hostility from locals, prompting them to take measures 
such as changing their license plates to match their new region of residence in an 
effort to avoid conflic
103 Language barriers also influe ced relocation decisions, 
with some Russian-speaking displaced people choosing to move to Odesa – where 
approximately 80 percent of the population speaks Russian –
104 to avoid the stigma 
they faced in other areas in Ukraine.105 However, as displaced people have adapted 
to their new communities, these tensions have gradually lessened. According 
99  UNDP . 2024. Social Cohesion in Ukraine: Community Dynamics Amidst War.
100  UNDP . 2024. Social Cohesion in Ukraine: Tolerance, Trust, and Social Inclusion. Part II.
101  IOM. 2025.  Displacement and Social Cohesion in Ukraine.
102  IDMC. 2023. Ukraine: Durable Solutions a Distant Prospect for Many IDPs.
103  KII 8, NGO staff working with IDP
104  Rating Group. 2023. Municipal Survey: May 2023.
105  KII 15, INGO staff
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  46
to FGD participants across diffe ent regions, shared experiences of hardship, 
cooperation in rebuilding efforts, and mutual support have helped bridge early
divides. 
Desp ite these divisions, informal support networks remain vital. In some 
communities, residents share food and household goods with communities 
requiring assistance, including displaced people. However, tensions arising from 
perceived inequities in aid distribution can place strain on these relationships. 
Over time, collective endeavours – such as seasonal fruit-picking – have helped 
displaced people and residents connect on shared goals. 
People with disabilities participating in the FGDs typically report positive 
relationships with those around them; many describe a strong sense of social 
inclusion within their immediate communities, marked by mutual trust, respect, 
and informal caregiving arrangements. Respondents across multiple oblasts 
shared that neighbors often assist with tasks such as fetching water, buying 
groceries, or navigating damaged infrastructure. While some mentioned 
challenges in accessing formal services or occasional feelings of marginalization 
in public spaces, day-to-day interactions with neighbors were overwhelmingly 
described as supportive and reliable. Although challenges persist, the war 
in Ukraine has, in multiple cases, sparked a heightened sense of solidarity, 
compelling individuals to unite to overcome adversities.
Socio-cultural and gender norms
Evolving gender roles
According to a World Vision study conducted across oblasts in Ukraine’s four 
macro-regions,106 nearly 40 percent of respondents have observed significant 
changes in gender dynamics since the start of the full-scale invasion.107 Even 
before the war, women in many parts of Ukraine were increasingly assuming both 
professional and domestic responsibilities, often managing household finances,
running errands, and caring for children independently. The war in Ukraine has 
accelerated this shift, creating new job opportunities for women in traditionally 
male-dominated fields li e driving, delivery, and security. This change is largely 
driven by the mobilization of many men for military service or their departure 
from the country. Women are therefore increasingly both primary caregivers and 
de facto breadwinners, compounding the emotional and physical pressures they 
face.
108 Nonetheless, some FGD participants in the Dnipropetrovsk oblast noted 
that women are finding ways to maintain social connections th ough community 
106  Ukraine’s four macro-regions are: Kyiv + North, West + Centre, East, and South.
107  World Vision. 2024. Gender-Based Violence in Ukraine Amid War: Assessment Report. (Sample: 
2,800 respondents)
108  KII 20, working gr oup staff
PAGE  47
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
groups and clubs, which provide mutual support and foster a sense of solidarity.109 
On the other hand, men who remain at home due to fear of conscription and 
limited job opportunities often take on additional household responsibilities, such 
as cooking and cleaning, reflecting a b oader shift in traditional gender roles.
Women’s influence also xtends further into family decision-making, particularly 
around household budgets and food purchases. According to WFP’s 2023 annual 
country report, 45 percent of households receiving cash-based transfers from 
WFP reported that women alone decide how to allocate the aid, compared to only 
eight percent for men. Similarly, among households receiving in-kind assistance, 
53 percent reported that women determine how to distribute the aid, versus nine 
percent for men.
110 
Protection risks
Conflict Sensitivity 
Disputes over humanitarian aid are relatively rare in Ukraine, and all participants 
consistently acknowledged that assistance is provided free of charge. However, 
tensions arise when certain groups perceive aid distribution as unfair or influenced
by political motivations. While humanitarian organizations are generally seen as 
neutral, some participants voiced frustration with feeling overlooked or excluded 
from receiving aid. If community members feel they are not consulted or fairly 
targeted, mistrust and tensions can escalate, weakening the perceived neutrality of 
humanitarian actors.
Crowding at distribution sites can sometimes lead to short-lived conflicts, though
better coordination and scheduling have helped reduce these issues. Nonetheless, 
overcrowding remains a significant conflict sensitivity concern because i
fuels frustration not only among beneficiaries themselves but also t ward aid 
organizations.  FGD participants described chaotic lines, inadequate crowd 
management, and long waiting times with no guarantee of receiving aid, all of 
which contributed to tension and complaints.
111  While participants did not always 
clarify whether these challenges reflected cur ent conditions or past experiences, 
some noted that the organization of aid distribution has improved since the start 
of the full-scale invasion.
112 
Additionally, the perception of politicized aid distribution is a significant conflic
sensitivity risk. In contexts where local authorities or influential individuals
109  FGD 10, with women (18-59), Dnipropetrovsk oblast
110  WFP . 2024. Ukraine Annual Country Report 2023.
111  FGD 12, with older women (59+), in Dnipropetrovsk oblast; FGD 14, with IDPs, in 
Dnipropetrovsk oblast; FGD 20, with women (18-59), in Odesa oblast; FGD 21, with older women (59+), 
in Odesa oblast; FGD 23, with Older men (59+), in Mykolaiv oblast; FGD 40, with IDPs, in Vinnytsia oblast
112  FGD 6, with men (18-59), in Kharkiv; FGD 10, with women (18-59), in Dnipropetrovsk
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  48
have control over beneficiary lists or distribution p ocesses, communities may 
view access to aid as dependent on personal or political connections. These 
concerns become even more pronounced during program transitions – such as 
downsizing or shifting to development-focused support – when fewer people 
receive assistance and targeting becomes stricter. Without clear communication 
and accountability, this can heighten social tensions and undermine trust in both 
humanitarian actors and local governance. Additionally, the visible presence 
of military representatives at some distribution points has deterred men from 
accessing assistance due to fears of conscription.
113 
Safety, dignity, and do no harm
Despite ongoing efforts to imp ove accessibility, many still face challenges in 
obtaining aid safely. Overcrowded distribution points, long waiting times, and 
security risks – such as shelling in regions affected y active hostilities – create 
dangerous conditions for collecting assistance. To address this, some organizations 
have introduced mitigation measures such as scheduled aid pick-up appointments, 
door-to-door deliveries (especially for vulnerable individuals and those in high-
risk areas), the use of services like Nova Poshta, a Ukrainian postal and courier 
company, and increased staffing at distribution cen es to ensure safer and 
more efficient distribution ocesses. In addition to improving safety, many 
FGD participants emphasized that these more discreet and fl xible distribution 
methods not only reduce exposure to physical risks but also promote more 
dignified access to aid, particularly for individuals who may feel stigmatized or
physically unable to queue at public distribution points.
Generally, people’s sense of safety is shaped by the ongoing war. In oblasts 
affected y active hostilities, such as Donetsk and Kharkiv, frequent air alarms and 
a shortage of bomb shelters intensify safety concerns. In oblast like Zaporizhzhia, 
the lack of legal aid and psychological support further contributes to the sense of 
vulnerability. Recognizing this, participants also called for mental health support 
alongside material aid, emphasizing the need for psychological care to help people 
cope in an environment where both security and stability remain in short supply.
Mistrust in law enforcement was also highlighted by FGD participants as a factor 
undermining their sense of safety. FGD participants residing in a temporary 
settlement also reported feeling unsafe due to its proximity to abandoned 
buildings with drug activity and homeless populations, noting that their repeated 
calls to construct a fence around the area had been ignored by authorities.
114 
113  KII 20, working group staff
114  FGD 33, with IDPs, Kyiv Oblast
PAGE  49
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Meaningful Access
Across all the assessed community groups, cash assistance is overwhelmingly 
preferred as it allows people to prioritize their most urgent needs, including food, 
medicine, utilities, and rent. Participants emphasized that financial aid offer
greater fl xibility and autonomy, helping them manage expenses over time and 
reducing their dependence on in-kind distributions, which usually have to be 
collected in person. However, in-kind assistance remains essential in specific
contexts – particularly in regions affected y active hostilities, rural communities, 
and oblasts with limited access to markets, clean water, or heating. In some 
situations, the form of aid is less important than its availability; for example, 
displaced people often rely on housing support – whether in the form of financial
assistance to cover housing costs or access to physical shelters – as they frequently 
face difficulties in finding and a ding suitable accommodation.
Physical barriers also limit access, especially in remote or conflict-affected eas, 
where reduced public transit, damaged infrastructure, and security risks make it 
difficult to each assistance points and essential services. According to participants 
residing in smaller frontline towns such as those located in the Donetsk oblast, 
public transportation services have been reduced, forcing people to travel long 
distances to reach basic services such as markets, healthcare facilities, and aid 
distribution points. People living in rural areas, including internally displaced 
people, are particularly impacted by the discontinuation of public transport 
services, which has limited their ability to reach humanitarian centres.  
In some frontline cities, such as Myrnohrad in Donetsk oblast, a 20-hour curfew 
severely restricts movement. Other cities in Kharkiv and Kherson oblasts also 
impose long curfews, sometimes lasting up to 16 hours. To improve access, an 
NGO has launched social bus services in communities across Donetsk oblast, 
ensuring that people in vulnerable situations can access essential services and 
assistance.  
Limited digital literacy among certain population groups – such as older people 
or individuals with disabilities that may impact their ability to navigate or 
complete application forms –hinders access to assistance. This issue is further 
exacerbated by short application windows, driven by high demand and limited 
supply of support. Furthermore, individuals are often required to provide 
extensive documentation to prove eligibility, which can be difficult to obtain
This poses a particular challenge for displaced people, who may have lost or left 
behind essential documents, and for Roma individuals, who often lack officia
documentation altogether.  When registering for humanitarian assistance, 
participants also expressed concerns over data security. Many participants across 
diffe ent oblasts hesitate to share personal information – such as passport 
numbers, tax IDs, or bank details – due to fears of fraud, misuse, or lack of
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  50
transparency. They are more willing to provide this information if it guarantees 
assistance, but feel uncomfortable sharing it when there is no certainty of 
receiving aid. 
Service disruptions due to insecurity add another layer of exclusion. FGD 
participants in areas affected y hostilities described how frequent shelling, 
power outages, and disrupted supply chains have hindered access to basic 
services like healthcare, clean water, and solid fuel for heating. These conditions 
disproportionately affect the older people, persons with disabilities, and esidents 
in remote rural villages, many of whom lack transportation or digital access to 
humanitarian registration systems. Finally, in areas affected y active hostilities, 
access to cash assistance is further constrained by logistical disruptions, with 
participants frequently reporting difficulties eceiving payments due to damaged 
ATMs.
The first obstacle is that he cannot receive it [aid] because 
he has no information, he does not know where to get it 
at all… it is so difficult to fill out the forms and the time is 
very limited. Because our computer literacy is so low, we 
can’t do it in time.
FGD 19, with older men (60+), Zaporizhzhia oblast
Accountability
When it comes to the source of aid, many respondents express a strong 
preference for assistance from international organizations over local authorities 
or organizations (CSOs/NGOs). International organizations are seen as more 
transparent, reliable, and better resourced, whereas local entities are often 
viewed as inefficient, s wer in reponse, or prone to favoring certain individuals 
or groups over others in aid distribution. Participants across diffe ent regions 
described instances where local actors appeared to prioritize friends, relatives, 
or those with personal connections, leading to perceptions of nepotism and 
corruption. In contrast, respondents felt that international organizations follow 
more standardized procedures and are less vulnerable to local power dynamics or 
manipulation. 
For instance, In Vinnytsia, participants described scandals where local leaders 
appropriated international humanitarian aid, distributing it under their own names 
to boost their political profiles
115 However, it is worth noting that some of the 
115  FGD 39, with older men (60+), Vinnytsia oblast
PAGE  51
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
claims raised during data collection are based on personal accounts and are not 
always supported by concrete evidence.
There was a scandal with humanitarian aid; … Groysman 
hid some humanitarian aid. This aid was distributed 
exclusively to certain people. It included hygiene products. 
He received it from some international organization but 
presented it as his assistance.
FGD 39 with older men (60+), Vinnytsia region
Effective communication is also a ey accountability concern. Poor information 
sharing between aid providers and the affected people can lead to frust ation and 
complicate access, making it difficult for people to understand wh e to go, how to 
apply, and who is eligible to receive support. In Odessa, for instance, participants 
reported that information about WFP assistance is unclear, leaving many of the 
participants unsure about where to register.
116
Accountability to affected people
Participation in decision-making
In contrast to humanitarian organizations’ efforts to distribute information mo e 
widely, actual decision-making about aid distribution remains concentrated 
among key institutions. International humanitarian organizations apply their 
own targeting frameworks, which are informed by needs assessments and 
consultations with relevant Ukrainian authorities. Meanwhile, government bodies 
and community-level organizations (village councils, housing cooperatives, heads 
of hromada) support allocation by identifying and providing lists of individuals 
eligible for aid. In Donetsk and Kharkiv oblast, for example, territorial centres and 
city councils coordinate with social welfare departments to identify beneficiaries.
In Lviv, the Social Protection Office valuates individuals’ eligibility based on factors 
like displacement or disability status.
Community members who participated in this study reported feeling excluded 
from meaningful participation in decision-making processes. This perception is 
echoed by a CARE survey conducted in Dnipropetrovsk, Kharkiv, Mykolaiv, and 
Odesa, which found that 88 percent of men and women respondents were rarely 
or never consulted by aid organizations about their needs.
117 It is important to 
note, however, that while these specific individuals may not have been consulted,
116  FGD 20, with women (18-59), Odessa oblast
117  CARE International. 2023. Rapid Gender Analysis: Ukraine. (n=611)
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  52
many humanitarian organizations do rely on needs assessments involving selected 
samples. As such, although some voices were not included, others may have 
contributed to the design of aid programs.
Respondents expressed a desire for greater transparency and inclusivity in 
aid distribution decisions. A common concern was the lack of clear eligibility 
criteria, leading to frustration and perceptions of unfairness. Many participants 
reported that they did not understand why some individuals received assistance 
while others did not. To address this, they suggested publicly clarifying eligibility 
requirements, increasing the overall quantity of aid to reduce denials, and 
implementing pre-registration or scheduling systems to minimize overcrowding. 
Additionally, some participants in Vinnytsia region described feeling humiliated or 
stigmatized when forced to wait in long queues for aid items they may not need 
but feel obligated to accept. As a solution, they proposed the introduction of small 
“free choice” shops where recipients can select only the items they require, as well 
as sheltered distribution points to protect them from harsh weather conditions.
It’s awful. You feel like an animal in a zoo. They give you 
something, you come, and you might not even like it or 
need it, but you go out of necessity.
FGD 38, with women (18-59), Vinnytsia oblast
Information Provision
Humanitarian actors use a combination of digital and traditional channels to reach 
broader populations across Ukraine. Many people learn about aid opportunities 
through social media platforms such as Facebook, Instagram, Telegram, and 
TikTok. For example, Telegram is used by organizations to communicate with 
each other, as well to post information about the possibility of providing diffe ent 
types of assistance.
118 However, direct communication through phone calls, 
instead of relying solely on digital platforms, is seen as essential for reducing 
misunderstandings and frustration between potential beneficiaries and aid
providers. It ensures clearer information and enables more human interaction, 
allowing questions to be asked and answered effectivel . Additionally, commonly 
used communication methods – such as word of mouth, SMS notifications, adio 
announcements, billboards, local councils, and community networks – remain 
crucial, particularly in smaller and frontline towns with limited internet coverage 
and among hard-to-reach groups who do not always trust outsiders.
119 
118  KII 8, NGO staff working with IDP
119  KII 15, INGO staff
PAGE  53
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
These preferences and constraints have led local actors to adopt a variety 
of context-specific communication st ategies across diffe ent regions. In 
Dnipropetrovsk oblast, for example, the city council website and broadcast media 
(radio and TV) are key platforms for announcements about aid distribution or 
transport options.
120 In contrast, the Zaporizhzhia oblast local authorities and 
NGOs sometimes visit villages directly to register potential recipients. Meanwhile, 
in Vinnytsia oblast, the city council uses billboards and a hotline system to help 
bridge information gaps.
Digital literacy is a significant factor in Ukraine’s 
humanitarian landscape. As a digitally connected country, 
Ukraine relies heavily on platforms like Telegram for 
sharing information about services and distributions.
KII 15 with IO representative
Community Feedback Mechanism
Respondents widely reported using social media platforms such as Viber, 
Telegram, and Facebook to provide feedback to aid providers, valuing them for 
their ease of use and anonymity. While in-person feedback remains an option, 
many avoid it due to long wait times when trying to speak with a representative, 
security risks, or fear of mistreatment. For people in vulnerable situations, specific
feedback channels are adapted to their needs. Within Roma settlements, displaced 
communities, and groups with limited digital literacy, hotline calls, and personal 
visits serve as the main avenues for providing feedback and raising concerns. 
When communicating with assistance providers for information or clarification,
most people prefer using hotlines which offer a di ect channel for submitting 
requests and complaints, as well as social media, local hromada leadership, or 
in-person visits to the organization’s office. wever, participants noted that 
hotlines lack the anonymity provided by social-media feedback streams. Some FGD 
participants also called for more frequent surveys and direct outreach to ensure 
aid providers remain accountable and responsive to evolving needs.
Ultimately, despite widespread data-privacy worries, communities continue to seek 
ways to make their voices heard. Strengthening trust, instituting transparent data-
protection measures, and offering multiple avenues of communication – digital,
telephone-based, and in person – can foster more inclusive and effective feedback
processes.
120  FGD 11, with male (18-59), Dnipropetrovsk oblast
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  54
Community-Specific Findings
Women (18-59)
Demographics and current humanitarian situation for women (18-59)
In 2021, Ukraine’s population was approximately 41.4 million, with women 
comprising 53.6 percent of the total. However, due to the ongoing war and its 
humanitarian impact, the number of Ukrainians residing within national borders 
has decreased, with estimates indicating that 37.9 million people remain in the 
country in 2024, of whom 53.5 percent (approximately 20.26 million) are women.
121 
The full-scale invasion has triggered significant demog aphic shifts, including 
mass displacement, migration, and changes in household structures. According to 
REACH, 64 percent of households are now female headed,
122 as many men have 
been conscripted into military service. Additionally, women make up 72 percent 
of those registered as unemployed and 56 percent of the country’s 3.7 million 
internally displaced people, highlighting the disproportionate impact of the full-
scale invasion on women.
123
With more men conscripted, women face growing 
caregiving demands. They now manage not only household 
duties but also external tasks. This responsibility extends 
to caring for returning veterans with disabilities and 
assisting with evacuations, especially for older family 
members (from South and East).
KII 14 with IO representative
Provision and access to basic services and resources
Women from FGDs aged 18 to 59 identified their primary needs as healthca e 
(particularly for children), childcare, access to utilities or support for utility costs, 
employment, and financial securit . According to REACH, the most frequently 
reported priority needs among female-headed households (FHHs) include 
medicine (39 percent), food (37 percent), healthcare (28 percent), and fuel for 
heating (17 percent), reflecting the u gent challenges they face in meeting basic 
necessities.
 124
121  UNFPA. 2024. Ukraine Population Data.
122   REACH. 2024. Multi-Sector Needs Assessment: G  ender, Age, and Disability Situation Overview. 
(Sample 13,322 households)
123  UN Women. 2024. Women and Girls After Two Years of War in Ukraine.
124  REACH. 2024. Multi-Sector Needs Assessment: Gender, Age, and Disability Situation Overview. 
(Sample 13,322 households)
PAGE  55
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
As reported by several women during FGDs, government clinics often have 
long waiting times, while private healthcare remains unaffo dable for people in 
vulnerable situations. The lack of medical specialists, particularly in pediatrics, in 
smaller towns such as those in Kharkiv and Zaporizhzhia oblasts forces residents 
to travel long distances for treatment.
125
I have a younger child who needs a specialist, a paediatric 
neurologist. But unfortunately, there is none in our town. 
We had to look for one in Kharkiv.
FGD 5, with women (18-59), Kharkiv oblast
Women who participated in FGDs across all oblasts also reported that access 
to utilities and their costs are among the most pressing challenges they face. 
Frequent power outages disrupt daily life, affecting heating systems, water access,
and remote education. According to a study conducted by REACH, 17 percent of 
women consider fuel for heating one of their most urgent needs.
126 
All residents were transferred to individual heating. The 
price is high, people have no jobs in the city because 
everything is closed, we are in a combat zone. Secondly, 
there will be no electricity because nearly the entire 
energy infrastructure is damaged.
FGD 10, with women (18-59), Dnipropetrovsk oblast
Limited access to childcare significantly impacts wome ’s ability to work, 
forcing many to stay at home to care for their children. In several oblasts, public 
kindergartens remain closed or operate at reduced capacity, while private 
childcare options are often too expensive for most families.
Employment opportunities for women with small children 
are limited, because you have no institution to take your 
kids.
FGD 16, with women (18-59), Zaporizhzhia oblast
125   FGD 5 and 16, with women (18-59), Kharkiv and Zaporizhzhia oblasts 
126  REACH. 2024. Multi-Sector Needs Assessment: Gender, Age, and Disability Situation Overview. 
(Sample 13,322 households)
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  56
Provision and access to assistance
Women participating in FGDs often reported relying on a mix of external aid, 
informal work, and support from family networks to meet their basic needs. 
Although 94 percent of women report no barriers to accessing food assistance,
127 
strict eligibility criteria and paperwork that is difficult to obtain e barriers for 
some individuals to access assistance. 
Women FGD participants widely expressed a preference for cash assistance or 
vouchers rather than in-kind aid, stating that financial support p ovides greater 
autonomy in covering essentials such as rent, utilities, and clothing. Available 
data shows that women are more likely than men to apply for cash assistance,
128 
with single mothers showing particularly high demand—70 percent apply for 
financial aid, compa ed to the overall average of 54 percent.
129 Despite widespread 
appreciation for food distributions, some women note inefficiencies, l e receiving 
the same staple items repeatedly while lacking basics like oil or margarine. In areas 
where organizations offer both cash assistance and food pa cels, most recipients 
strongly prefer having the fl xibility to choose between the two options.
Despite ongoing aid efforts, significant gaps emain, especially in the distribution 
of hygiene products.
130 These items are often provided inconsistently, with many 
women suddenly losing access to them, as they may not be able to affo d them on 
their own. Single mothers and those without formal employment face additional 
barriers, as they often do not qualify for state benefits and ely heavily on limited 
humanitarian aid. 
[before the war] I could buy and eat, buy clothes for a 
child, pay utility bills… When they give 3 kg of flour as 
humanitarian aid, I would rather buy 1 kg of flour and a jar 
of pate. And the rest of the money, I would leave for utility 
services.
FGD 26, with women, Kherson oblast
127  WFP . 2024. Ukraine Annual Country Report 2023.
128  CARE International. 2023. Rapid Gender Analysis: Ukraine.
129  KII 19, INGO staff
130  FGD 16, with women (18-59), Zaporizhzhia oblast
PAGE  57
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Economy and livelihoods
Access to jobs
Despite the availability of jobs in sectors such as beauty services, factory work, 
social services, the food industry, and trade, female participants reported 
structural barriers – such as limited qualifications and inadequate childca e 
options – that prevent them from securing stable employment. Some women, 
adapting to the changing economy, create online content on platforms like 
YouTube to earn extra income.131
Finding a job has become increasingly difficult in many areas due to the 
destruction of facilities. On average, the unemployment rate of women aged 18–50 
is eight percent. Among displaced women (18–59), the unemployment rate is 20 
percent, while the employment rate is 45 percent. For non-displaced women, the 
unemployment rate is seven percent, while the employment rate is 65 percent. 
Additionally, 18 percent are engaged in housework, 6 percent are living with 
disabilities, and three percent are non-working students. Among returnees, the 
unemployment rate is 13 percent, while the employment rate is 63 percent.132 In 
some rural areas, available jobs offer very low wages, making them unattractive 
despite widespread unemployment. Women in urban areas have a higher 
employment rate of 66 percent, compared to 59 percent for women in rural areas, 
further highlighting geographical disparities.133
Persistent wage inequality also undermines women’s financial stability, with 
women earning almost 19 percent less than men for equivalent work.134 Despite 
many women increasingly becoming the primary breadwinners and taking on 
roles traditionally dominated by men, they continue to face significant pay 
disparities. This forces them to work more – often in multiple jobs or in informal 
sectors – not just to cope with rising costs, but to compensate for their lower 
earnings compared to men. The wage gap is most pronounced among women 
aged 25–44,135 who, facing high unemployment and limited formal job 
opportunities (especially for unskilled workers), often turn to informal or part-time 
work such as housekeeping, sewing, baking, or collecting and selling recyclable 
materials – such as scrap metal, plastic bottles, glass, and cardboard – to make 
ends meet. As economic hardship deepens, some women face heightened risk of 
exploitation, including being forced into survival sex work or becoming targets of 
human trafficking. 136 
131  FGD 20 (2), with women (18-59), Odessa (2) oblast
132  REACH. 2024. Multi-Sector Needs Assessment: Gender, Age, and Disability Situation Overview. 
(Sample: 13,322 households)
133  Ibid
134  Ibid
135  Ibid
136  KII 14, IO Staff
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  58
Reduced economic opportunities have also led to an 
increase in survival sex work and trafficking… This has also 
resulted in a rise in online recruitment for exploitative 
purposes.
KII 14 with IO representative
Human, social, natural, physical, and financial capital
For a significant number of women, financial assistance (whether om 
government programs or humanitarian organizations) remains their primary 
income source, yet these benefits often fall short of meeting basic xpenses. 
Female-headed households (FHHs) are particularly vulnerable with 21 percent 
relying on government or social benefits
137
When families do receive support from relatives living abroad or in safer parts 
of Ukraine, the assistance varies significantl , ranging from consistent financial
transfers to sporadic in-kind support. According to a study conducted by REACH, 
nine percent of women receive remittances.
138 Some enjoy consistent remittances 
covering food, utilities, and other daily costs, while others receive no external 
aid at all. In Kherson, a woman described how her husband’s continued work 
abroad secures them a stable income,
139 whereas participants in other oblasts rely 
sporadically on parcels of food and clothing from friends.
Those of my friends, acquaintances who left…they help 
with clothes. My friend sends me her son’s things from 
Germany.
FGD 31, with women (18-59), Kyiv oblast
137  REACH. 2024. Multi-Sector Needs Assessment: Gender, Age, and Disability 
Situation Overview. (Sample: 13,322 households)
138  Ibid
139  FGD 26, with women (18-59), Kherson oblast
PAGE  59
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Community structure and meaningful participation
Information and knowledge management
Given their numerous responsibilities and limited free time, women need concise, 
direct, and easily accessible communication about available assistance and 
services. According to International Rescue Committee (IRC) data, 72 percent of 
women surveyed indicated a preference for receiving information about assistance 
through phone calls or SMS, 31 percent through direct contact with IRC staff, and
21 percent through updates from local authorities.
140 This highlights the need 
for accessible, varied communication methods – ranging from offline channel
to centralized digital platforms – so that women can promptly learn about 
available assistance. In line with these preferences, participants across multiple 
oblasts suggested expanding offline communication via billbo ds, noticeboards, 
and community meetings; offering t ansparent information through trusted 
local sources such as city councils, religious organizations, and verified NGOs;
enhancing online registration systems to be more user-friendly; and providing 
hotlines or SMS notifications for those without egular internet access. 
Socio-cultural and gender norms
Evolving gender roles
Beyond demographic changes, the war in Ukraine has altered gender roles and the 
labor market. With many men either serving in the military or displaced, women 
have increasingly stepped into roles traditionally dominated by men, particularly 
in agriculture, transportation, and industry.
141 This shift has not only increased 
women’s participation in the formal workforce but has also expanded their 
responsibilities in community leadership, household financial management, and
essential service sectors. While these changes highlight women’s resilience and 
adaptability, they also underscore the long-term social and economic challenges of 
evolving gender roles in households and workforce participation amid an ongoing 
war. Some women participating in the FGDs reported feeling underprepared for 
these new responsibilities, often lacking the necessary training or skills —such as 
IT or foreign languages—to make a successful career transition. Although some 
have pursued online courses or support through employment centers, access 
remains inconsistent and hampered by financial, informational, and structu al 
barriers.
140  IRC. 2024. Ukraine Multisectoral Need Assessment Report – March 2024. (Sample: 732 
respondents) 
141  UN Women. 2024. Women’s Economic Empowerment in Ukraine During Russia’s Invasion.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  60
Women bear the burden of everything. Nowadays, a 
woman is a mother, father, grandmother, grandfather, and 
neighbour. 
FGD 38, with women (18-59), Vinnytsia region
Protection risks
Gender-based violence 
GBV remains a serious issue in Ukraine, exacerbated by conflict-related 
hardships. A study by World Vision found that the main triggers of GBV 
were poor living conditions, cited by 42 percent of respondents, and the 
character of the perpetrators, cited by 40 percent of respondents. 
Women are most commonly abused by current partners, with 23 
percent of those who reported psychological violence142, 27 percent of 
those who experienced economic violence143, and 20 percent of those 
subjected to physical violence144 identifying their partner as the 
perpetrator. Among the 12 percent of respondents who reported 
experiencing sexual violence, the most common perpetrators were male 
relatives (36 percent) and partners (27 percent). 145 In cases of sexual 
harassment, which were reported by 54 percent of respondents, 
strangers were identified as the most frequent perpetrators, accounting 
for 41 percent among those experiencing such abuse.146
Many survivors do not seek help due to stigma or lack of trust in 
institutions – 27 percent believe reporting will not change anything, 
while 24 percent see it as a private matter.147 As a result, only 
24 percent of survivors of physical or sexual violence seek help. Limited 
access to mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS), particularly 
in rural areas, hinders recovery, with 32 percent of women 
142  Psychological violence: Emotional abuse such as insults, humiliation, threats, or intimidation
143  Economic violence: Control or restriction of access to financial esources or economic 
independence
144  Physical violence: Acts involving physical harm, including hitting, pushing, or other forms of 
bodily harm
145  Sexual violence: Non-consensual sexual acts
146  Sexual harassment: Unwanted sexual comments, gestures, or advances
147  World Vision. 2024. Gender-Based Violence in Ukraine Amid War: Assessment Report. (Sample: 
2,800 respondents)
PAGE  61
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
aged 19–59 reporting a lack of services.148 Additionally, as noted 
by a UNFPA staff member, the number of gender-based violence 
complaints reported to the police has significantly increased since the 
start of the international armed conflict. However, it is important to 
highlight that reporting GBV incidents to the police remains uncommon 
in Ukraine, typically occurring only as a last resort in life-threatening 
situations.149
Various types of assistance are provided to survivors of GBV. Women 
who have experienced GBV frequently express a need for food 
assistance, a recurring request identified by UNFPA in GBV shelters. This 
need is especially urgent as many women arrive at shelters with no 
belongings, having fled their homes without money or food. While 
humanitarian assistance is essential for survivors, it must be provided 
carefully to avoid exacerbating their risk of further harm.
For cash assistance provided through GBV case 
management, we [Member of IO] must carefully consider 
the potential risks that this support could create. For 
example, if a woman returns home with cash, and the 
perpetrator is still present, there is a risk that the situation 
could escalate and become dangerous for the victim of 
GBV.
KII 12 with IO representative
In line with these broader GBV challenges, the 2023 Sexual Exploitation 
and Abuse Risk Assessment Report highlights that ongoing conflict, 
displacement, and socio-economic pressures significantly heighten SEA 
risks for marginalized women and girls. Underreporting persists due to 
stigma and limited awareness of reporting mechanisms, while frontline 
relief activities and cash assistance programs can inadvertently magnify 
risk without robust prevention measures.150
To address growing humanitarian needs, a harmonized response 
framework is being developed by the Gender-Based Violence Area of 
Responsibility (GBV AOR) and the protection cluster. The first phase 
prioritized emergency in-
148  CARE International. 2023. Rapid Gender Analysis: Ukraine. (Sample: 611 respondents)
149  KII 18, IO staff
150  PSEA Network Ukraine. 2024. Ukraine Sexual Exploitation and Abuse Risk Assessment Report 
2023.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  62
kind or cash assistance for GBV survivors, low-income families, and 
internally displaced people no longer receiving state allowances, while 
the second phase focuses on linking affected individuals to sustainable 
livelihood opportunities.151 Given the vulnerability of GBV survivors, 
immediate financial support is prioritized over long-term employment 
solutions,152 and the Ukraine PSEA Network emphasizes the importance 
of integrating SEA risk mitigation – such as clear reporting pathways, 
staff training, and strong coordination with GBV services – into these 
assistance efforts to ensure survivors receive comprehensive, survivor-
centered support. 
153
Men (18-59)
Demographics and current humanitarian situation 
In 2024, Ukraine’s population is estimated to be 37.9 million, with men accounting 
for approximately 46.5 percent, or 17.6 million.154 The ongoing war prompted the 
conscription of a substantial portion of the male population, requiring men aged 
25 to 60 to register for military service. Consequently, there is a noticeable absence 
of men in public spaces, as many have been conscripted or attempt to avoid 
conscription. 
155
The war in Ukraine has contributed to a significant number of male casualities. 
According to Ukraine’s President, as of February 2025, more than 45,000 men have 
been killed on the battlefield, and over 390,000 soldiers have been wounded.
156 
Provision and access to basic services and resources
Men from the Mykolaiv oblast participating in FGDs reported needing access 
to clean and reliable water sources, describing it as one of the region’s most 
pressing and unresolved issues, with tap water deemed unsafe even for washing.
157 
Participants have also identified access to quality education for their children, 
adequate medical services, and essential medicines as essential needs. They also 
emphasized the need for functional transportation and basic necessities such 
as food, clothing, and heating materials as the ongoing shelling, curfews, the 
risk of conscription, and economic hardships further limit their ability to secure 
151  KII 13, cluster staff and KII 18, IO staff
152  KII 18, IO staff
153
  PSEA Network Ukraine. 2024. Ukraine Sexual Exploitation and Abuse Risk Assessment Report 
2023.
154
  UNFPA. 2024. Ukraine Population Data.
155  FGD 11. Men (18-59), Dnipropetrovsk oblast
156  The Kyiv Independent. 2025. Over 45,000 Ukrainian soldiers killed since start of war, Zelensky 
says
157  FGD 22, Men (18-59), Mykolaiv oblast
PAGE  63
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
livelihoods and access essential resources.
Many men avoid registering for assistance or visiting public distribution centres 
due to fears of conscription, as concerns over sharing personal information and 
being identified discou age participation. This reluctance limits their access to 
essential support, leaving them without much-needed aid. To address this issue, 
participants suggested implementing a family-based registration system, allowing 
one household member to submit documents and collect aid on behalf of the 
family, reducing individual exposure. Additionally, increasing transparency about 
how personal data is used and protected could help alleviate fears and build trust, 
ensuring that those in need feel safer accessing humanitarian assistance.
Economy and livelihoods
Access to jobs
In Ukraine, 63.9 percent of men rely solely on paid work as their income source, 
often avoiding assistance programs due to fears associated with registration.158 
However, they face significant challenges in the labor mar et, with 25 percent of 
men aged 26-50 engaged in unstable employment, compared to 15 percent of 
women in the same age group. Among men aged 18-25 and 26-50, employment 
stands at 59 percent and 84 percent, respectively. However, 19 percent of men 
aged 18-25 hold unstable jobs,
159 compared to 25 percent of men aged 26-50. 
According to REACH, this diffe ence is linked to concerns about conscription, which 
influence empl yment stability among men in these age groups.
160 Employment 
conditions also vary by displacement status, with returnee men aged 18-29 having 
the highest employment rate (83 percent) compared to displaced (68 percent) and 
non-displaced men (78 percent).
161 
Beyond these employment challenges, the risk of conscription has become a 
significant barrier to securing formal work, as job opportunities for men a e often 
tied to their military service status.
162 To be officially ployed, men are required 
to obtain documents from Territorial Centres of Recruitment (TCR). This process 
necessitates registration with the TCR or visits to their offices, which many me
avoid due to fears of conscription. Employers are also hesitant to hire men, as they 
may face conscription if regulations change, further restricting their employment 
158  CARE International. 2023. Rapid Gender Analysis: Ukraine.
159  Unstable jobs: Unstable, low-paying, and insecure forms of employment
160  REACH. 2024. Multi-Sector Needs Assessment: Gender, Age, and Disability Situation Overview. 
(Sample: 13,322 households)
161  REACH. 2024. Multi-Sector Needs Assessment: Gender, Age, and Disability Situation Overview. 
(Sample: 13,322 households)
162  CARE International. 2023. Rapid Gender Analysis: Ukraine. (Sample: 611 respondents)
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  64
opportunities. To navigate these challenges, many men resort to unofficia
employment, which offers income but lacks stabilit , legal protections, and social 
benefits.
What we said was that a lot of jobs require you to go to 
the military registration and draft office first. And that’s a 
problem. 
FGD 11, with men (18-59), Dnipropetrovsk oblast
Human, social, natural, physical, and financial capital
Male-headed households rely less on remittances (four percent) and social 
benefits (21 pe cent) compared to female-headed households.163 Some male 
participants reported receiving support from friends and relatives, including those 
living abroad, though this depends on household composition and available social 
networks. While external humanitarian assistance remains a crucial lifeline, many 
households also rely on savings, maintaining livestock, or engaging in gardening 
to secure food. Others adjust by cutting non-essential expenses, taking on part-
time work, or participating in local bartering networks to exchange goods or sell 
homemade products.
Protection risks
Community safety
Male FGD participants expressed heightened feelings of insecurity due to the 
persistent risk of mobilization. Men consider avoiding conscription because 
of inadequate material support (66 percent), lack of required training before 
assignment to the unit (64 percent), and the possibility of being injured or killed 
(64 percent).164 This fear greatly limits their ability to move freely and maintain 
normal routines, often forcing them to remain in hiding to avoid being drafted. 
How can you be protected as you walk around the city and 
look around to avoid encountering a certain category of 
military personnel? 
FGD 11, with men (18-59), Dnipropetrovsk oblast
163  REACH. 2024. Multi-Sector Needs Assessment: Gender, Age, and Disability Situation Overview. 
(Sample: 13 322 households)
164  Texty.org.ua. 2024 Мобілізація: що відлякує і що мотивує.(Sample: 400 respondents)
PAGE  65
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
In oblasts that have been occupied, men face a high risk of landmine explosions, 
especially during agricultural work, which remains a predominantly “male” sphere. 
According to Help Women Agro in Ukraine, before the full-scale invasion about 
70 percent of the total number of farmers and small and medium agricultural 
producers in Ukraine were men.
165 These dangers are compounded by limited 
access to critical safety information, such as how to identify and avoid landmines, 
and emergency procedures for handling unexploded mines. The threat is 
particularly acute in oblasts affected y active hostilities like Kherson, where the 
risk of unexploded ordnance is widespread. 
This knowledge gap is particularly concerning in regions 
like Kherson, where unexploded ordnance is prevalent. 
This poses heightened risks for individuals working in 
agriculture, as there has been an increase in injuries due 
to mine-related incidents as people continue working on to 
fields despite these dangers to secure livelihoods. 
KII 14 with IO representative
Gender-based violence 
A World Vision study found that 65 percent of male participants had 
experienced psychological violence. Among them, 24 percent said it 
came from their current partners, 23 percent from colleagues, and 22 
percent from female friends. Economic violence was reported by 53 
percent of men, with 30 percent attributing it to current partners and 
another 30 percent to female relatives. Physical violence affected 33
percent of respondents, with 27 percent identifying female colleagues 
as the perpetrators. Female colleagues were also most often named 
as the source of sexual harassment (24 percent) and sexual violence 
(29 percent). In total, 36 percent of men reported being harassed, and 
9 percent said they were victims of sexual violence.
166
NGO representatives have noted a growing number of men becoming 
victims of conflict- elated GBV – particularly sexual violence and 
torture – in occupied territories and regions affected y active 
165  AgroPortal. 2023.  В українському агросекторі все ще мало жінок. Про компанію, яка руйнує 
стереотипи
166  World Vision. 2024. Gender-Based Violence in Ukraine Amid War: Assessment Report.(Sample 
1400 respondents)
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  66
hostilities. This is especially concerning given the risk of abduction 
by the Russian army in these areas. Addressing conflict- elated GBV 
against men remains particularly challenging due to stigma, shame, 
and limited monitoring mechanisms that hinder reporting and 
intervention. Additionally, many men feel excluded from awareness 
campaigns, which primarily focus on women, and some fear that 
coming forward may lead to forced military service.
167
There is also a pronounced lack of shelters, crisis rooms, and 
specialized support services for male survivors. Facilities intended for 
women survivors explicitly prohibit men, leaving them with few safe 
options. Furthermore, there is a shortage of medical and psychological 
professionals trained to handle the specific needs of male survivors
All services such as shelters, crisis rooms, and daycare 
centres are targeted and are safe spaces for women 
and girls, and males are not allowed there. So, we 
don’t have specialized services. Meanwhile, 10 percent 
of our survivors are males. Most of them experience 
psychological violence, but sometimes they require 
relocation, and there is no service to support this. There 
are also survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, and 
we don’t have specially trained doctors who can provide 
relevant care for male survivors of rape or other types of 
sexual violence.
KII 12 with IO representative
167  CLEAR. 2024. Communicating About Gender and Violence in Ukraine.
PAGE  67
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Older people (59+)
Demographics and current humanitarian situation 
Ukraine has one of the highest proportions of older people in Europe, with 
individuals aged 60 and above making up around a quarter of its population. 
Additionally, 37 percent of households in Ukraine are headed by individuals aged 
60 or older. 
Older people have been disproportionately affected y the war in Ukraine, 
accounting for 35 percent of civilian deaths in the first year of fighting. yond 
the direct impact of violence, they face a range of unique challenges including 
widespread poverty and an inability to meet basic needs, limited access to food, 
utilities, clothing, healthcare, and transportation, as well as age discrimination 
in the labor market. Additionally, many older individuals struggle with digital 
literacy and social isolation, which hinders their ability to access vital services and 
assistance.
168
Provision and access to basic services and resources
Older Ukrainians often rely on small pensions that barely cover everyday expenses, 
let alone medical costs. As of October 1, 2024, the average monthly pension in 
Ukraine was UAH 5,852 (approximately USD 147.3), with about 30 percent of 
pensioners receiving less than UAH 3,000 (USD 75.5).
169 Given these financial
constraints, many older individuals identify access to medicine and healthcare as 
their top priority.
170 
Although many areas have healthcare facilities, attacks on them have severely 
limited their capacities to provide care to older people.
171 Mobile healthcare 
teams and pharmacies in rural areas provide some services, but they are often 
insufficient to meet the needs of older people. Even with price eductions for 
pensioners, the high cost of medicines and diagnostic tests remains a major 
barrier, forcing many to choose between medical care and other essential 
expenses. As a result, many older participants reported discontinuing necessary 
treatments because they simply cannot affo d them.
Compounding these challenges, a shortage of medical professionals—including 
doctors and nurses—has led to the closure of some medical departments, causing 
overcrowding in those that remain operational. In oblasts such as Dnipropetrovsk 
168  World Bank. 2024. Ukraine - Third Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment (RDNA3) (Report No. 
P180174).
169  Vox Ukraine. 2024. Pension System in Ukraine: Citizens’ Perspective.
170  WFP . 2024. Ukraine Annual Country Report 2023.
171  Ibid
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  68
and Mykolaiv, certain healthcare facilities also lack essential resources, such as 
ambulances, making it even more difficult for people in emote areas to access 
timely medical care.
172
Provision and access to assistance
Older men and women face heightened challenges due to isolation and lack of 
financial esources, with their primary concerns being access to utilities, food, and 
hygiene products, including incontinence materials for those over 65.
173 Those 
living closer to regions affected y active hostilities experience even greater 
hardships due to the direct impacts of the war. For older individuals with limited 
mobility, accessing bomb shelters is especially challenging, as many lack ramps 
and elevators.
Humanitarian aid has played a crucial role in supporting older people, with food 
kits from organizations providing essential items like rice, oil, and canned goods. 
However, access to aid is not universal, as many older individuals face mobility 
challenges or struggle with the technology needed to register for assistance. 
Lacking familiarity with digital tools, many find it difficult to access information 
how to apply for aid or locate support, further complicating their ability to navigate 
an already complex humanitarian system.
174 Nevertheless, local communities 
often play a crucial role in supporting older people by facilitating the collection 
of information and the distribution of aid from international organizations. Many 
participants noted that associations in their apartment buildings help coordinate 
and streamline the distribution of food and relief boxes, ensuring that assistance 
reaches those in need more efficient .
This UN assistance, these boxes, are brought by a vehicle. 
The head [of the condominium], together with those who 
should receive them, give each resident a package based 
on this list.
FGD 27, with older women (60+), Kherson oblast
172  FGD 13 and 23, with older men (60+), Dnipropetrovsk and Mykolaiv oblasts
173  CARE International. 2023. Rapid Gender Analysis: Ukraine.
174  REACH. 2024. Multi-Sector Needs Assessment: Gender, Age, and Disability Situation Overview. 
(Sample: 13,322 households)
PAGE  69
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Economy and livelihoods
Access to jobs
While most older FGD participants reported being retired, their modest pensions, 
coupled with rising costs of basic necessities such as healthcare, hygiene products, 
utilities, and food, have led some to consider returning to work to supplement 
their income and cover essential expenses. However, with many older individuals 
facing chronic health concerns and reduced physical capabilities, they are 
often barred from certain physically demanding jobs. Tasks that require heavy 
lifting, prolonged standing, or exposure to harsh conditions can be particularly 
challenging, effectively limiting their empl yment opportunities in several 
industries.
There are those who are not allowed to do so [work] due 
to their health. Right? You won’t go to work in a meat 
processing plant, a dairy, or a fish cannery
FGD 7, with older women (60+), Kharkiv oblast
Additionally, even when older individuals are qualified and willing to work, th y 
often face age discrimination, with employers hesitant to hire them due to 
perceived limitations or concerns about long-term productivity. In general, 26 
percent of Ukrainians believe that there is age discrimination in the Ukraine.
175 
Finally, most of older people participants reported not receiving remittances from 
family members. 
Community structure and meaningful participation
Information and knowledge management
Despite the efforts of humanitarian o ganizations to spread information about 
available assistance, many older individuals and those without digital access 
continue to struggle to stay informed. When it comes to receiving information 
on assistance, Dnipropetrovsk and Vinnytsia oblasts stand out for their localized 
communication practices: in Dnipropetrovsk oblast, housing cooperatives post 
announcements on building doors, fostering community-driven information 
sharing, while in Vinnytsia oblast, residents rely on in-person updates through 
city councils and church announcements. In fact, many participants expressed 
preferences for direct, accessible methods of communication. According to REACH, 
among older people-only households, 40 percent prefer face-to-face interactions, 
175  Kharkiv Institute of Social Research. 2025. Ageism in Ukraine: round discussion.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  70
while 32 percent favor phone calls.176 
In Lviv oblast, older FGD participants prefer to be contacted directly by phone, 
while in Kharkiv oblast, residents appreciate clear text message updates from 
territorial centres. In Dnipropetrovsk, Mykolaiv, and Zaporizhzhia oblasts, Viber 
is a popular platform for receiving information. However, older individuals 
would benefit f om simpler, more direct methods such as phone calls or public 
announcements.
177 Participants in Vinnytsia oblast highlighted the importance of 
local government offices, city councils, and in-person communication as eliable 
sources.
178 In Sumy oblast, although Facebook and other social media platforms 
occasionally provide updates, there is a clear preference for more consistent and 
accessible channels to ensure broader community reach.
179 In addition, older 
women in Odessa oblast reported being hesitant to rely on online platforms to 
receive assistance, due to concerns about scams and fraud.
180
These challenges go beyond communication, directly impacting access to 
assistance. Older people, including those with disabilities, often face significant
difficulties navigating digital egistration processes. In the Mykolaiv oblast, older 
FGD participants reported facing difficulties completing the steps equired to 
receive aid due to challenges using IBANs and providing geolocation information. 
181 Online registration systems that operate on a first-c me, first-served basis tend
to favor individuals with fast internet connections and strong digital skills, enabling 
them to secure aid more quickly. In contrast, those using slower devices, dealing 
with poor connectivity, or lacking digital literacy are often unable to register on 
time and are consequently excluded. Addressing these barriers through alternative 
registration methods and simplified application p ocedures could ensure a more 
inclusive approach to humanitarian support.
Protection risks
Community safety
The sense of safety among older communities in Ukraine varies by oblast and 
is shaped by factors such as conflict, economic ha dship, and limited access to 
healthcare. In Lviv, concerns include a rise in crime driven by financial struggles
and occasional tensions related to language diffe ences, particularly for older 
176  REACH. 2024. Multi-Sector Needs Assessment: Gender, Age, and Disability Situation Overview. 
(Sample: 13,322 households)
177  FGD 12, 19, 23, with older men and women (60+), Dnipropetrovsk, Mykolaiv, and Zaporizhzhia 
oblasts
178  FGD 39, with older men (60+), Vinnytsia oblast
179  FGD 30, with older men (60+), Sumy oblast
180  FGD 21, with older women (60+), Odessa oblast
181  FGD 23, with older men (60+), Mykolaiv oblast
PAGE  71
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Russian speakers.182 
Across assessed oblasts, older individuals often struggle to access adequate 
healthcare, shelters, and distribution points due to mobility challenges and limited 
financial esources. These difficulties, compounded y loneliness, further heighten 
their sense of insecurity, especially during health emergencies. As a result, many 
older individuals report feeling neglected.
 If you get to the hospital and you have no money, they 
won’t even treat you, they won’t even accept you. They 
won’t even look in your direction.
FGD 21, with older women (60+), Odesa region
Roma community 
Demographics and current humanitarian situation 
Since the last census in Ukraine was conducted in 2001, and given the subsequent 
occupation of certain territories by Russia as well as widespread internal and 
external displacement, it is difficult to determine the xact number of Roma 
people currently living in the country. According to estimates, approximately 
200,000 to 400,000 Roma people lived across Ukraine before the full-scale 
invasion. The largest Roma communities were in the Kharkiv, Odesa, and 
Zakarpattia oblasts.
183 Following the full-scale invasion in 2022, around 100,000 
Roma people, predominantly women and children, were forcibly displaced, with 
approximately 50,000 leaving Ukraine to seek safety in other countries.
184
The Roma community in Ukraine is highly diverse, and despite diffe ences in 
education, income, and place of residence, they continue to face the highest levels 
of prejudice and discrimination.
185 Ongoing difficulties ith social integration 
increases their vulnerability, limiting access to essential services, legal protections, 
and economic opportunities, especially during wartime. This necessitates strong, 
targeted support from both governmental and non-governmental organizations to 
ensure inclusion, protection, and access to aid.
Provision and access to basic services and resources
182  FGD 36, with older men (60+), Lviv oblast
183  Minority rights group. 2020. Roma in Ukraine.
184  Голос Ромні. 2024. Становище ромських громад під час війни в Україні. (512 respondents)
185  KIIS. 2022. Interethnic Prejudice in Ukraine.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  72
Compact Roma settlements are frequently established without legal 
authorization,186 resulting in the absence of essential infrastructure such as 
centralized water supply, electricity, and heating systems. Even in areas where 
basic services are available, residents often report poor quality and limited 
reliability. During FGDs conducted in Marhanets (Dnipropetrovsk oblast) and 
Vysokopillia (Kherson oblast), Roma participants highlighted that the water in their 
homes was unsuitable for cooking or drinking, necessitating travel to obtain clean 
water or dependence on humanitarian aid.
187 Additionally, gas pipelines have 
been damaged due to ongoing military actions, and no repair efforts a e currently 
underway. As a result, residents are compelled to use fi ewood for both heating 
and cooking purposes, which they are often forced to collect themselves – making 
this a physically demanding and time-consuming coping strategy.
Considering these challenges, the primary needs identified within Roma
communities include fi ewood, access to clean water, hygiene kits (such as diapers 
and sanitary pads), essential medicines, children’s clothing, and home repairs. 
It is very difficult to live with the amount of money I have. 
I go to the pharmacy every month and throw money away. 
It was warm in the summer, but now I also have to buy or 
collect firewood. But my health doesn’t allow me to go and 
collect firewood. I either buy food or firewood or pills for 
myself.
FGD 15, with Roma community, Dnipropetrovsk oblast
Ethnic discrimination significantly hinders Roma communities f om accessing 
not only medical services but also a wide range of public services that require 
interaction with state institutions. Due to fears of discriminatory treatment, many 
Roma individuals actively avoid contact with governmental representatives. This 
reluctance is often compounded by the absence of essential personal identification
documents, such as birth certificates and passports, which further estrict their 
ability to access basic services.
186  Compact Roma settlements are areas where a significant number of Roma people live in
close proximity, often forming ethnically homogeneous communities.
187  FGD 15 and 28, with Roma community, Dnipropetrovsk and Kherson oblasts
PAGE  73
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
The Roma population faces documentation issues. 
UNHCR works closely with Roma civil society to ensure 
that they have birth certificates, citizenship papers and 
other documentation. This is crucial because having 
documentation makes it harder to deny them their rights, 
including access to health care, financial support and other 
services
KII 20 with working group staff
The lack of proper documentation significantly estricts access to housing after 
forced displacement, making it difficult for Roma individuals to sec e rental 
agreements. Beyond these bureaucratic barriers, discriminatory practices by 
landlords further restrict their housing options.
188
Provision and access to assistance
Some NGOs frequently exclude Roma people from aid distribution lists, often due 
to stereotypes that portray the Roma community as isolated, making it difficul
for non-specialized organizations to establish contact. However, representatives 
from organizations actively working with Roma populations refute this notion, 
emphasizing that Roma individuals are present on digital platforms and accessible 
via phone, making it feasible for NGOs to provide support when committed to 
inclusive outreach.
You can get access, and anyone who wants to help can get 
access to the Roma community, you just have to do it and 
that’s it.
KII 1 with an NGO representative working with Roma 
communities
Additionally, access to humanitarian assistance typically requires basic 
identification documents, such as a passport or a tax identification number
However, many Roma individuals lack these essential documents, which 
automatically excludes them from receiving aid. This barrier prevents them from 
accessing food distributions, financial support, medical aid, and other critical elief 
services. As a result, Roma communities remain disproportionately vulnerable 
188  KII 14, INGO
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  74
in crisis situations, unable to benefit f om humanitarian programs designed to 
provide assistance.189
Economy and livelihoods
Access to jobs
Access to stable employment and fair wages remains an unmet need within 
Roma communities in Ukraine. According to a quantitative survey conducted 
by “Active Group” for the NGO “Golos Romni,” 62 percent of Roma respondents 
reported being entirely dissatisfied with the availability of jobs and decent
wages.
190 A representative from an organization working with Roma communities 
estimated the employment rate among Roma people to be approximately 40 
percent – slightly below the estimated national employment rate of 45 percent for 
individuals aged 15 and above in 2024.
191 
Employment is influenced y multiple structural barriers, including:
•
 Ethnic discrimination: Widespr
ead stereotypes, such as the belief that 
Roma individuals are prone to theft, lead many employers to reject Roma job 
applicants. 
•
 Lo
w literacy levels: A significant portion of the Roma population lacks
basic literacy skills, including reading and writing, which poses a barrier to 
employment opportunities.
•
 Limited qualifications: Due to lo
w literacy rates, many Roma individuals have 
not completed formal education, including vocational or higher education, 
which limits their access to skilled labour markets.
As a result, Roma individuals are often restricted to low-skilled or seasonal 
employment. For example, many Roma women participate in agricultural work, 
such as harvesting, which is primarily available during spring and summer. 
However, during winter, rising heating costs, dwindling supplies of home-grown 
food, and a decline in job opportunities compound financial ha dships, straining 
household resources.
Women in Roma communities are frequent recipients of various forms of 
humanitarian assistance, while men are more commonly engaged in informal 
side jobs to support their households.
192  A distinction also exists between Roma 
individuals residing in compact settlements and those living separately in urban 
189  KII 14, INGO
190  Голос Ромні. 2024. Становище ромських громад під час війни в Україні. (512 respondents)
191   KII 1, NGO staff working with Roma communities; orld Bank. 2025. Macro Poverty Outlook. 
192   Голос Ромні. 2024. Становище ромських громад під час війни в Україні. (512 respondents)
PAGE  75
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
areas or suburban regions. For those living in compact settlements, income is 
often unstable and comes primarily from informal activities such as begging and 
fortune-telling. In contrast, Roma individuals living independently in cities or 
suburban areas more frequently report having stable employment and generally 
deny engagement in fortune telling as a source of income.
193
Community structure and meaningful participation
Information and knowledge management
Information about available humanitarian support within Roma communities 
is primarily disseminated through community leaders and direct personal 
communication with community members. Some respondents also indicated 
that they occasionally visit NGO offices to obtain informatio
194 Additionally, 
details regarding assistance may be shared through messaging platforms such 
as Telegram and Viber. A representative from an NGO working with Roma 
communities emphasized that Viber is particularly widespread among Roma 
populations, underscoring the importance of utilizing this platform for effective
outreach.
195
Decision-making processes
Decision-making regarding health, well-being, nutrition, and other forms 
of assistance within Roma communities is primarily centralized around the 
community leader, often referred to as the “block person.” This individual typically 
gathers information about the needs of community members and plays a key role 
in coordinating support.
196
Additionally, social workers or representatives from humanitarian organizations 
occasionally visit Roma settlements. Based on their observations during these 
visits, they assess the community’s needs and determine the type of assistance 
required.
197
Conflict dynamics
Social cohesion
It is important to note that opportunities for socialization outside the Roma 
community tend to be greater for men. Women, on the other hand, are more 
constrained by traditional norms and behavioral expectations, primarily interacting 
with family members or individuals closely connected to the family, which limits 
193  Голос Ромні. 2024. Становище ромських громад під час війни в Україні. (512 respondents)
194  FGD 15 and 28, with Roma community, Dnipropetrovsk and Kherson oblasts
195  KII 1, NGO staff working with Roma communitie
196  FGD 15, with Roma community, Dnipropetrovsk oblast
197  FGD 15, with Roma community, Dnipropetrovsk oblast
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  76
their social engagement beyond these circles.198
To support the integration of Roma communities into Ukrainian society, NGOs 
should ensure that aid is provided in an inclusive manner. Efforts should focus
on fostering integration by engaging Roma individuals alongside the general 
population.
For example, a representative from an organization working with Roma 
communities shared a successful practice where their Roma-led organization 
hosted a children’s event open to both Roma and non-Roma children. Additionally, 
they organized a summer camp in the Carpathian Mountains with designated 
quotas for Roma children while ensuring participation was open to children 
from other backgrounds. Such inclusive approaches help break down barriers, 
encourage intercultural exchange, and support long-term social cohesion.
199
In many cases, women are expected to surrender their earnings to male family 
members, seek permission or accompaniment to leave the home, and refrain 
from sitting at the same table as men during meals. However, these practices are 
not commonly perceived by women as discriminatory. Instead, they are often 
viewed as cultural traditions, with some women finding comfort in adhering to the
customs followed by their ancestors.
200
Human rights violations
Roma individuals face systemic oppression and widespread discrimination across 
nearly all spheres of social life, including:
•
 Education: Instances wher
e parents protest against their children studying 
alongside Roma children, as well as prejudiced treatment from teachers.
•
 Healthcar
e: Denial of medical services 
•
 Emplo
yment: Refusal to hire Roma individuals due to discriminatory 
stereotypes.
•
 Housing: Rejection fr
om landlords when attempting to rent apartments.
•
 Public Per
ception: Frequent exposure to hate speech targeting Roma 
communities.201 
Discrimination within Roma communities tends to disproportionately affect
those with darker skin tones and black hair, as physical appearance often plays 
198  Voice of Romni. 2024. Voice of Romni: Identity, gender aspects, and traditions 
199  KII 1, NGO staff working with Roma communitie
200  Голос Ромні. 2024. Становище ромських громад під час війни в Україні. (512 respondents)
201 Ibid
PAGE  77
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
a significant ole in reinforcing ethnic stereotypes. Some respondents reported 
attempting to mitigate discrimination by altering their appearance, such as dyeing 
their hair, to avoid being perceived as Roma.
Those who look more like gypsies might be ‘attacked’. And 
if you are born with red hair or blond hair, how will they 
know that you are a gypsy? There are redheaded girls. They 
are not called gypsies. So, you have to dye your hair. 
FGD 15, with Roma community, Dnipropetrovsk region
Protection risks
Gender-based violence 
GBV remains prevalent within many Roma communities. As previously 
noted, a significant number of Roma women a e unaware that they 
are experiencing systemic violence, as harmful practices are often 
normalized within the cultural framework. For instance, physical 
punishment is frequently perceived as an inherent aspect of Roma 
identity and tradition rather than a violation of rights. Additionally, 
social norms in many Roma communities discourage women from 
discussing family matters with outsiders, including other Roma. As 
a result, it is uncommon for Roma women to report GBV-related 
incidents to law enforcement authorities, further perpetuating cycles 
of violence and limiting access to protection and justice for survivors.
202
People with Disabilities 
Demographics and current humanitarian situation 
Depending on the degree of health impairment, adults are assigned to one of 
three disability groups:
 203
• Gr oup I Disability – individuals who have completely lost their ability to work 
and require constant care.
•
 Gr
oup II Disability – individuals who are capable of self-care but unable to work 
202  Voice of Romni. 2024. Voice of Romni: Identity, gender aspects, and traditions
203  Resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine № 1317
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  78
under standard working conditions.
•
 Gr
oup III Disability – individuals who are able to work under light-duty 
conditions.
As of 2024, an estimated 3 million people in Ukraine are living with disabilities. This 
figu e has increased significantly since the start of the full-scale invasion, primarily
due to military actions causing debilitating injuries to soldiers and civilians alike. 
Prior to the war, around 13,000 individuals were diagnosed with a new disability 
annually. Since the full-scale invasion this number has risen dramatically to 
approximately 150,000 new cases per year.
204 Additionally, the types of injuries 
have shifted, with a substantial increase in sensory impairments, such as hearing 
and vision loss.
205
The humanitarian situation for people with disabilities and their families is dire. 
Over 2 million people with disabilities are in urgent need of assistance206, as the 
majority live below the poverty line. Humanitarian aid is a crucial lifeline.
…without those [humanitarian] organizations, without the 
humanitarian response that exists within the framework 
of various clusters, UN agencies, our people [people with 
disabilities] would not have survived 
KII 10 with an NGO representative working with people with 
disabilities
Provision and access to basic services and resources
People with disabilities reported similar levels of service provision compared to 
people without disabilities. However, disruptions in the provision of basic services 
disproportionately affect them, xacerbating their vulnerabilities and limiting their 
access to essential resources. For example, individuals with limited mobility cannot 
obtain water without assistance during central water supply outages.  Similarly, 
power cuts leave homebound people unable to leave their homes and immobilize 
those who rely on electric wheelchairs, which cannot be recharged.
207
Access to facilities such as shelters, and hygiene rooms presents additional 
challenges. Many shelters remain physically inaccessible to people with disabilities 
204  Ministry of Social Policy Ukraine. 13.06.24. Main news.
205  KII 10, NGO staff working with PWD
206  OCHA. 2023. Humanitarian needs and response plan Ukraine.
207  FGD 9 and 37, with PWDs, Kharkiv and Lviv oblasts
PAGE  79
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
owing to lack of elevators and ramps, for example, and public buildings often 
lack hygiene rooms adapted to their needs, preventing independent use. While 
34 percent of the general population say that bomb shelters are sufficient, 2
percent of persons with Group III disability status say they are sufficient, alongsid
23 percent of persons with Group II status, and 22 percent of those with Group I 
status.
208 Evacuation also remains a critical challenge, as it is often carried out by 
untrained volunteers who may lack the necessary skills and resources to safely 
assist people with disabilities. This heightens the risks for those affected, leaving
them particularly vulnerable in high-risk situations where specialized support is 
essential.
Medical care is both the most essential and the most challenging service for 
people with disabilities. 
We repeatedly hear from our colleagues and partners 
that the health of people with disabilities has significantly 
deteriorated due to the deterioration of access to medical 
supplies and medical care in general
KII 10 with an NGO representative working with people with 
disabilities
According to a UNDP report, somewhat or very efficient healthc e is reported 
by 42 percent of people with disabilities in regions affected y active hostilities, 
compared to 49 percent of people without disabilities in regions affected y active 
hostilities.
209  
Several key barriers hinder access to medical facilities for people with disabilities: 210 
•
 Physical inaccessibility: Many facilities, such as X-r
ay rooms and 
gynaecological chairs, are not suitable for people with disabilities.
•
 Staff shortages: 
The deficit of medical p ofessionals is particularly acute in 
areas close to the frontlines.
•
 Medication accessibility: People with disabilities often cannot affo
d 
necessary medications, many of which must be imported. Access to medicines 
is further complicated by logistical and pricing challenges due to ongoing 
208  USAID and UNDP . 2023. A Resilient Picture: Experiences of Persons with Disabilities in Ukraine. 
(Sample: 549 respondents)
209  Ibid
210  KII 10, NGO staff working with PWDs; FGD 9 and 37, with PWDs, Kharkiv and Lviv oblast
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  80
military operations.
Overall, among people with disabilities, the most vulnerable in terms of access to 
resources are the bedridden and members of the first disability g oup. 211
While education is not a direct concern for most adult people with disabilities 
interviewed, it poses significant challenges for child en with disabilities, particularly 
in the context of war. With many having transitioned to distance learning, children 
with intellectual, mental, and sensory disabilities face substantial difficulties i
accessing education, as remote formats often fail to accommodate their specific
learning needs.  
The first is access to education for children with 
disabilities, because in the conditions of war, many of 
them have switched to distance learning, and those 
with intellectual, mental, and sensory disabilities suffer 
greatly here. As well as access to education for our injured 
defenders, when they need to receive a new direction of 
education for their further activities
KII 10 with an NGO representative working with people with 
disabilities
Provision and access to assistance
87 percent of families with a member with a disability reported wanting aid in the 
future, while only 25 percent received assistance in the past three months.
212 Two-
thirds (66 percent) of people with disabilities use welfare payments frequently 
compared to 29 percent of people without disabilities. Additionally, 13 percent of 
people with disabilities use humanitarian aid frequently, compared to six percent 
of people without disabilities.
213
Despite ongoing aid efforts, participants identified veral challenges in the 
delivery of assistance. Due to the overall decline in available support and the 
tightening of eligibility criteria, assistance is now primarily allocated to the people 
in the most vulnerable situations. As such, support for individuals with third-group 
disabilities has declined, leaving them in increasingly vulnerable conditions.
211  FGD 9 and 37, with PWDs, Kharkiv and Lviv oblasts
212  REACH. January 2024. Multi-Sector Needs Assessment: Gender, Age, and Disability Situation 
Overview REACH Initiative. (Sample: 13,322 households)
213  USAID and UNDP . 2023. A Resilient Picture: Experiences of Persons with Disabilities in Ukraine. 
(Sample: 549 respondents)
PAGE  81
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Beyond reduced support, logistical and structural barriers further limit access. In 
some cases, organizations purchase mobility aids without considering individual 
size requirements, increasing the risk of injury. Additionally, the limited number 
of social workers makes it difficult to provide home visits and properly assess the 
needs of those with mobility challenges, leaving many without essential support. 
Online registration processes also create barriers for older individuals and people 
with hearing impairments, effectively excluding them from accessing vital aid. 
214
Moreover, organizations should tailor assistance to individual needs and actively 
engage with communities through door-to-door visits to assess needs and provide 
direct support. Additionally, alternative methods for delivering information about 
available assistance and enabling sign-ups should be implemented to ensure 
inclusivity. Participants also suggested updating international conventions and 
resolutions to better reflect local contexts, helping to address region-specific 
barriers and bridge the gap between international standards and practical 
implementation.
215
Economy and livelihoods
Access to jobs
The employment rate among people with disabilities over the age of 14 remains 
critically low, standing at approximately 20 percent.216 For comparison, the 2024 
forcast places this indicator at 45 percent for the general population.217 This low 
rate is attributed to several factors, including persistent discrimination, stereotypes 
about people with disabilities’ inability to perform job responsibilities or maintain 
long-term employment, and the lack of workplace adaptations for people with 
disabilities.  By law, employers are subject to a four percent hiring quota for 
people with disabilities, but they typically prefer to pay a fine rather than hire 
people with disabilities.
218 Although the government offers compensation for 
workplace adaptations for people with disabilities, employers must initially cover 
the costs themselves. Additionally, reimbursement is not guaranteed and requires 
navigating complex bureaucratic procedures, including submitting documents in a 
specific format and providing detailed reports on all purchases. These procedures 
may deter employers from making necessary workplace adjustments.
214  KII 10, NGO staff working with PWDs; FGD 9 and 37, with PWDs, Kharkiv and Lviv oblasts
215  FGD 9 and 37, with PWD, Kharkiv and Lviv oblasts
216  The League of Strong. 2025. The needs of persons with disabilities for livelihoods and access to 
the labor market in the context of war in Ukraine (Sample: 1,019 respondents)
217
  World Bank. 2025. Macro Poverty Outlook. 
218  World Bank. 2024. Ukraine - Third Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment (RDNA3) (Report No. 
P180174)
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  82
Community structure and meaningful participation
Information and knowledge management
Awareness of available assistance among people with disabilities is generally low, 
hindered by fragmented and disorganized information. Even when information 
is available, it is often inaccessible to people with disabilities with intellectual 
disabilities, as well as people with hearing/visual impairments.
The primary channel for accessing information about assistance is online 
platforms, including messaging apps and social media groups, such as Telegram 
and Facebook. Other sources mentioned by respondents include street 
committees, homeowners’ associations, territorial centres, social protection 
departments, and word of mouth. Occasionally, social centre representatives call 
individuals to inform them about available support.
Protection risks
Community safety
People with disabilities reported feeling unsafe, both physically and mentally, 
due to the ongoing war. This sentiment was also widely shared by the general 
population. People with disabilities described living in constant stress and tension, 
with the severity of these feelings often varying depending on their location. For 
instance, respondents from Kharkiv oblast highlighted these challenges more 
frequently. Some even reported turning to alcohol as a coping mechanism, though 
they acknowledged it provides little relief, while others found solace in housework 
or staying connected with friends and family.
219
For people with disabilities, their conditions often heighten their vulnerability – 
especially for those with severe disabilities (Groups I and II).  Individuals unable 
to move independently are almost entirely reliant on others, even for basic tasks 
such as using their pension cards to purchase food or medicine.
220 The situation is 
even more critial for individuals with psychosocial disabilities, who frequently face 
discrimination and social isolation as people avoid interacting with them. 
219  FGD 9 and 37, with PWDs, Kharkiv and Lviv oblasts 
220  KII 10, NGO staff working with PWD
PAGE  83
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
We have a huge stigma around people with psychosocial 
disabilities. The perception of these people is that they 
are aggressive, dangerous to society, mentally ill people 
with intellectual disabilities. When in fact, if we go back to 
the jurisprudence, it is these people who suffer the most 
from crimes and offences because they cannot defend 
themselves. 
KII 10 with an NGO representative working with people with 
disabilities
Human rights violations
30 percent of people with a Group I disability status report having been treated 
unfairly because of their health status or disability. This compares to 22 percent of 
people with Group II status and 20 percent of those with Group III status. Young 
people (aged 18 to 35) with disabilities report the highest levels of marginalization 
due to their health status.
221
Internally Displaced People 
Demographics and current humanitarian situation
As of December 2024, there are an estimated 3,665,000 internally displaced people 
in Ukraine. The largest number are in Dnipropetrovska (14%) and Kharkiv (12%) 
Oblasts, while the highest proportion originate from Donetska Oblast (28%). The 
most significant inter-oblast displacement m vements have been from Donetska 
Oblast to Dnipropetrovska Oblast (283,000 internally displaced people) and 
from Donetska Oblast to Kyiv City (131,000 internally displaced people).
222 Unlike 
other conflict-affected populations who elocate far from their regions of origin, 
Ukrainian internally displaced people tend to move to adjacent oblasts. However, 
worsening security and access to basic services due to Russia’s recent escalation in 
regions affected y active hostilities may drive more displacement westward.
 223
Females make up 59 percent of households made up of only displaced people, 
while males account for 41 percent. A majority (51 percent) are of working age, 
221  USAID and UNDP . 2023. A Resilient Picture: Experiences of Persons with Disabilities in Ukraine. 
(Sample: 549 respondents)
222  IOM. 2025. Ukraine Internal Displacement Report Round 19
223  KII 13, cluster staff
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  84
with 23 percent being children and 26 percent older people.224 Younger internally 
displaced people are more likely to rely on employment rather than humanitarian 
aid, while older individuals and young mothers make up the majority of those 
seeking assistance at humanitarian hubs.
 225
Humanitarian efforts inc easingly focus on regions affected y active hostilities, as 
well as collective sites and transit hubs where internally displaced people reside. 
Approximately 79,000 of Ukraine’s internally displaced people with complex 
needs live in 1,800 sites across 23 oblasts, mostly in the west.
226 Urban areas – 
while providing greater access to services – also expose displaced individuals, 
particularly adult men, to conscription risks.
227 
Provision and access to basic services and resources
Housing remains one of the most pressing challenges for internally displaced 
people, particularly in urban areas such as Kyiv city, where high rent prices and a 
lack of affo dable accommodation exacerbate insecurity. Rental market instability, 
fluctuating prices, and precarious lease agreements further contribute to the issue. 
Landlords frequently raise rent, citing inflation or planned epairs, while some 
evict tenants to reclaim their property.
228 As a result, just over one in four displaced 
households (26 percent) have moved to lower-quality dwellings, reflecting
the challenges of sustaining adequate rented accommodation in protracted 
displacement.
229 This issue is further compounded by winter-related vulnerabilities, 
as utility costs peak during colder months. Additionally, many internally displaced 
people struggle to secure new housing due to financial const aints and advocate 
for modular housing as a more sustainable solution.
230
High utility and rental costs, combined with prolonged displacement, have 
contributed to severe financial vulne abilities among internally displaced 
people. A significant portion eport being unable to affo d basic necessities 
such as power banks – especially critical due to increasing power outages – and 
essential medicines.
231 Access to housing depends on several factors, including 
the willingness of local authorities to engage with internally displaced people, 
the availability of temporary shelter, and community support for displaced 
populations. In areas where these conditions are met, internally displaced people 
224  IOM. 2025. Ukraine Internal Displacement Report Round 19
225  KII 8, NGO staff working with IDP
226    OCHA. 2025. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2025. 
227  KII 17, cluster staff
228  FGD 40, with IDPs, Vinnytsia oblast
229  IOM. 2025. Ukraine Internal Displacement Report Round 19
230  FGD 24, with IDPs, Mykolaiv oblast
231  IOM. 2025. Ukraine Internal Displacement Report Round 19
PAGE  85
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
are more likely to stay longer, as housing poses less of a challenge.232 However, 
discrimination in the rental market remains a significant barrier. Some landlo ds 
refuse to rent to internally displaced people, particularly families with children, 
older people, or those with disabilities, while others inflate ental prices upon 
learning that the prospective tenant is a displaced person. Negative perceptions of 
internally displaced people, often reinforced by isolated incidents of misbehavior, 
further contribute to this bias.
233
For those who have lost property documents, proving ownership and reclaiming 
compensation for their homes is particularly difficult. With no dedicate
government program to assist in restoring these documents, internally displaced 
people must navigate the standard judicial process, which is often lengthy and 
complex.
234
Food insecurity is another challenge, especially for internally displaced people 
paying rent, with 26 percent reporting that they cannot affo d food.235 Participants 
from modular settlements noted diffe ences in available services, with some towns 
providing communal kitchens where food is served, while in others residents have 
to obtain and prepare their own meals, further straining their limited resources.
236 
Provision and access to assistance
The displaced people allowance (IDP allowance), introduced in March 2022 under 
Resolution 322, was amended in March 2024 to limit eligibility to specific g oups 
due to rapid fund depletion. Initially, the allowance provided UAH 3,000 (USD 72) 
per month for people with disabilities and UAH 2,000 (USD 48) for other internally 
displaced people. In December 2023, new conditions were introduced, requiring 
unemployed internally displaced people to register at employment centres and 
discontinuing assistance for those who purchase assets exceeding UAH 100,000 
(USD 2,402), or had bank accounts surpassing this amount.
237
In March 2024, further amendments designated 10 vulnerable categories of 
internally displaced people (later expanded to 15) as eligible for six months of 
support, provided their household’s monthly income did not exceed UAH 9,444 
(USD 227).
238 Certain groups of displaced people, including pensioners with low 
pensions, people with disabilities in groups I and II, orphans, and children deprived 
of parental care, received an automatic extension, while others were required 
232  KII 8, NGO staff working with IDP
233  FGD 24 and 40, with IDPs, Mykolaiv and Vinnytsia oblasts
234  KII 8, NGO staff working with IDP
235  IOM. 2025. Ukraine Internal Displacement Report Round 19
236  FGD 33, with IDPs, Kyiv oblast
237  ReliefWeb. 2024. Update on Changes to Payment of IDP Allowance: CMU Resolution 332.
238  ReliefWeb. 2024. Update on Changes to Payment of IDP Allowance: CMU Resolution 332.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  86
to reapply.239 According to IOM, these changes led to 39 percent of internally 
displaced people losing access to the allowance, including 36 percent in regions 
affected y active hostilities. 240 
The shift away from blanket assistance aims to foster economic self-sufficienc
but requires significant investment in empl yment support, which currently 
exceeds the capacity of humanitarian actors. Development organizations are 
urged to enhance job placement initiatives, while humanitarian actors advocate 
for expanded livelihood support and improved referral mechanisms for people 
in vulnerable situations.
241 However, newly displaced individuals report similar 
challenges to those reported by earlier internally displaced people, particularly in 
securing essential items such as bed linens and blankets. As aid resources decline, 
meeting these basic needs has become increasingly difficul
242
Access to shelter remains a critical issue for a significant number of internally
displaced people. The Shelter Program, which helped internally displaced people 
secure temporary housing and compensated homeowners hosting them, was 
terminated in September 2024 due to funding shortages. However, it is set 
to resume in January 2025 under revised conditions.
243 Meanwhile, long-term 
housing solutions remain the government’s responsibility, with expectations of 
compensation for destroyed homes or financial aid for permanent elocation.
244
In response to the ongoing housing crisis, private foundations have launched 
construction projects for displaced individuals. However, internally displaced 
people residing in modular settlements report that neither they nor anyone in 
their communities have benefited f om these projects.
245
Beyond housing availability, administrators responsible for managing the 
settlement have highlighted pressing infrastructure needs, including paved 
pathways for wheelchair users and stroller access. Although these settlements 
fall under local government jurisdiction, internally displaced people report severe 
neglect of communal services, with essential maintenance, such as sewage 
disposal, occurring only twice over a 2.5-year period.
246
Economy and livelihoods
239  ReliefWeb. 2024. Update on Changes to Payment of IDP Allowance: CMU Resolution 332.
240  IOM.  2024. Ukraine IDP Allowance Update: Impact of the March 2024 Law Amendment on 
Ukraine’s Internally Displaced.(Sample: 40,00 respondents)
241  KII 7 and 12, Local government repr esentatives and IO staff
242  FGD 33, with IDPs, Kyiv oblast
 KII 8, NGO staff working with IDPs; FGD 14, with ID , Dnipropetrovsk oblast
243  KII 8, NGO staff working with IDP
244  KII 8, NGO staff working with IDP
245  FGD 33, with IDPs, Kyiv oblast
246  Ibid
PAGE  87
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Access to jobs
Internally displaced people face numerous challenges in securing stable 
employment and sustaining livelihoods. The widespread closure or relocation 
of businesses due to ongoing fighting has significantly educed available job 
opportunities. While some internally displaced people have managed to find work
with businesses that have relocated from conflict-affected eas,
247 others have 
taken a more entrepreneurial approach. For example, a displaced woman from 
Mariupol established a bakery in Kyiv city, which not only provides employment 
to fellow internally displaced people but also contributes to local humanitarian 
efforts
248
However, many internally displaced people remain in unstable employment 
situations. Some are still technically employed by their pre-war employers but are 
not receiving wages, which prevents them from registering as unemployed and 
accessing official job-seeking services t ough the employment centres.
249 This 
bureaucratic limbo further limits their ability to secure stable income and rebuild 
their lives.
Officially since they are technically employed, they cannot 
go and register at the employment centre. So, they do not 
get a wage, nor can they get hired elsewhere. People are 
hesitant to resign from their old jobs because they have 
hope to go back and if they do, they do not want to look for 
a new job. In theory they can resign and get registered with 
the employment centre and receive a voucher for a new 
profession 
KII 10 with an NGO representative working with internally 
displaced people
Several employment programs have been established to support internally 
displaced people. For example, an organization focused on supporting displaced 
people in Ukraine has a Memorendum of Understanding (MoU) with some 
Employment Centres to engage internally displaced people in their operations, 
with compensation provided through a government-funded program. Internally 
displaced people participate in activities such as loading and unloading aid and 
contacting other internally displaced people to register and inform them about 
247  FGD 24, with IDPs, Mykolaiv oblast
248  KII 8, NGO staff working with IDP
249  KII 8, NGO staff working with IDPs; FGD 24, with IDPs, My olaiv oblast
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  88
available assistance.250 
Employment centres provide financial assistance for up to th ee months to 
support individuals in their job search.251 They also contact registered job seekers 
to inform them of available opportunities; however, by the time individuals 
reach the Centre, many positions have already been filled
252 Vocational training 
programs, some funded by the International Committee of the Red Cross and 
other international organizations, provide vouchers for truck driver training and 
other high-demand fields
253 Community-based initiatives, particularly those led 
by women’s rights groups and local organizations, focus on empowering displaced 
women through skills training, contributing not only to employment but also to 
improved food security.
254 
Certain groups of internally displaced people face heightened employment 
difficulties. Older and adult internally displaced people who have lost emp yment 
records face challenges in proving their work history for pension eligibility. 
While electronic labor records have been maintained since 2000, archives from 
earlier years are incomplete, leaving some internally displaced people without 
the necessary documentation to claim their entitlements. Moreover, verifying 
employment is particularly difficult when the emp yer no longer exists or when 
individuals worked in areas that are now under Russian occupation.
255
250  KII 8, NGO staff working with IDP
251  FGD 40, with IDPs, Vinnytsia oblast 
252  FGD 24, with IDPs, Mykolaiv oblast
253  FGD 40, with IDPs, Vinnytsia obalst
254  KII 15, IO staff
255  KII 8, NGO staff working with IDPs; FGD 14 and 33, with IDPs, Dnip opetrovsk and Kyiv oblast
PAGE  89
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
For those under 40, they can get more job opportunities 
through trainings, but above that there are limited 
opportunities. This is particularly an issue for people close 
to retirement age, because they cannot access jobs, nor 
can they access their pensions
FGD 40, with internally displaced people, Vinnytsia region
To cope with the lack of livelihoods, internally displaced people have switched 
to cheaper food, spent their savings, reduced utility usage, cut back on food 
consumption and essential medical expenses, and relied on humanitarian 
assistance.
256 Overall, internally displaced people report using these coping 
mechanisms more frequently than non-displaced people. However, the greatest 
disparity is in dependence on humanitarian aid, with 51 percent of internally 
displaced people relying on it, compared to just 19 percent of non-displaced 
individuals.
257
Community structure and meaningful participation
Decision-making processes
Internally displaced people believe that aid organizations determine the 
assistance they receive.258 Internally displaced people living in urban areas report 
less engagement with aid-providing organizations, whereas in villages, these 
organizations collaborate with local authorities—such as social services and village 
heads—who are more familiar with the needs of both the local community and 
internally displaced people.
259 
Some local administrators have established displaced people councils (IDP 
councils), with more than 1,000 operating across Ukraine.
260 These councils serve 
in an advisory capacity, comprising equal representation of internally displaced 
people and local government officials involved in vernance matters affecting
internally displaced people, such as pension funds. However, these councils do not 
always function effectivel . 
256  FGD 24, with IDPs, Mykolaiv oblast; FGD 40, with IDPs, Vinnytsia oblast
257  IOM. 2025. Ukraine Internal Displacement Report Round 19. (Sample: 40,002 respondents)
258  FGD 14, with IDPs, Dnipropetrovsk oblast
259  FGD 24, with IDPs, Mykolaiv oblast
260  UNHCR. August 2024. Displaced themselves, and now advocating for the rights and durable 
solutions for all internally displaced in communities across Ukraine.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  90
In theory these councils were made to collect the problems 
of internally displaced people on the ground and voice this 
issue to military administrations and city self-government 
bodies. In practice, the included internally displaced people 
were already involved in state power/local self-government 
employees, so they just did what they were told. 
KII 8 with an NGO representative working with internally 
displaced people
Internally displaced people also report that while they receive their registration 
from one administrative body, aid is distributed through social services, which are 
often disorganized, frequently redirecting internally displaced people between 
diffe ent branches.
I wanted a voucher for a sanatorium. I went to social 
services. They gave me a paper. There are 30 offices. And 
I have to go around the city to find them and figure it out. 
You go there, and they say, “Why did you come here?” Then 
you go to another place, and they ask, “Why did you come 
here?” 
FGD 24, with Internally displaced people, Mykolaiv oblast
For those living in temporary settlements, the manager of the settlement is the 
one that communicates aid needs to the relevant organizations and authorities.
261 
Conflict dynamics
Social cohesion
While the diffe ence in aid distribution sometimes fuels resentment between 
internally displaced people and local residents, it can also serve as a means of 
fostering solidarity. Some internally displaced people use the assistance they 
receive to support those in need within their communities. 
261  FGD 33, with IDPs, Kyiv oblast
PAGE  91
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Let’s say I received humanitarian aid. I know someone 
in need—a woman who sells pies. She lives with her two 
sons, one struggling with addiction and the other with 
disabilities. She has high blood pressure but still gets up 
every day, bakes pies, and sells them to make ends meet. 
I know she’s struggling too. So, if I have extra cereal or 
pasta, I share it with her. I bring her some pâté or stew, 
and in return, she gives me pies. It’s a form of mutual aid. 
I also know that if I ever feel unwell, she—being a woman 
of faith—would come to help me faster than even the 
acquaintances who sheltered me but might not check in for 
weeks.
FGD 14, with internally displaced people, Dnipropetrovsk oblast
However, identity-based tensions – linked to political views, language, and 
sometimes religious beliefs – also affect elations between internally displaced 
people and host communities, especially for Internally displaced people from 
occupied areas such as Donetsk and Luhansk. In some regions, Russian-
speaking internally displaced people reported feeling stigmatized or suspected 
of sympathizing with occupying forces, prompting them to adjust their speech or 
avoid openly disclosing their places of origin. Such diffe ences occasionally result 
in social exclusion, impacting internally displaced people’ integration, access to 
local services, or feelings of safety within their new communities. 
While some internally displaced people build trusting relationships with their 
neighbors, others prefer to rely on fellow internally displaced people for support.
262 
Within internally displaced people communities, strong social networks often form 
based on shared regions of origin. Initiatives like the ‘I am Mariupol’ network or 
annual Luhansk Day gatherings provide spaces for internally displaced people to 
connect and support one another.
263
262  FGD 14 and 40, with IDPs, Dnipropetrovsk and Vinnytsia oblasts
263  KII 8, NGO staff working with IDP
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  92
Sievierodonetsk will unite with Sievierodonetsk. Mariupol 
residents have their own chat room called “I am Mariupol”. 
Crimeans have their own chat room and gather there. 
Luhansk residents gather once a year at the Pirogov 
Museum to celebrate the Day of Luhansk 
KII 10 with an NGO representative working with internally 
displaced people
Informal support networks within host communities also exist, with residents 
occasionally offering food and household items to those in need. H wever, 
lingering resentment over aid disparities persists.264 Trust levels vary, with newer 
arrivals often struggling to integrate into their host communities.265 In some areas, 
shared work activities—such as seasonal fruit-picking—have helped bridge social 
divides and foster cooperation between internally displaced people and locals.
266
Protection risks
Community safety
The sense of safety among internally displaced people is influenced y factors 
such as access to humanitarian aid, financial stabilit , and host community 
relations. Some feel protected due to family support and aid access, while others 
struggle with systemic challenges, including housing insecurity and economic 
instability.
267 Rising rent prices, the threat of eviction, and perceptions of internally 
displaced people receiving preferential treatment contribute to social tensions and 
chronic stress.
268
To improve safety and reduce social tensions, respondents suggest increasing 
financial support for housing, xpanding temporary shelter options, and creating 
long-term housing programs for internally displaced people.
269 Aid distribution 
processes should also be made more discreet, including options for direct home 
delivery and through Nova Poshta to reduce stigma.
270 People in vulnerable 
situations, including older people, should receive targeted outreach, and aid 
264  FGD 24 and 33, with IDPs, Mykolaiv and Kyiv oblasts
265  FGD 40, with IDPs, Vinnytsia oblast
266  Ibid
267 KII 8, NGO staff working with IDPs; FGD 14 and 40, with IDPs, Dnip opetrovsk and Vinnytsia 
oblast
268  FGD 40, with IDPs, Vinnytsia oblast
269  FGD 40, with IDPs, Vinnytsia oblast 
270  Ibid
PAGE  93
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
providers should enhance communication through direct phone calls rather than 
relying solely on digital platforms like Telegram.271 Strengthening mental health 
support, such as integrating psychologists into aid teams, was also recommended 
to help address the emotional toll of displacement.
272
LGBTQIA+ communities
Demographics and current humanitarian situation
Before the full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine, LGBTQIA+ individuals were 
already among the country’s most marginalized populations.
273 The full-scale 
invasion has only exacerbated these vulnerabilities, especially for those who have 
become internally displaced.
274 It is estimated that LGBTQIA+ individuals may 
comprise up to nine percent of Ukraine’s internally displaced population, which 
would amount to over 300,000 people.
275
Despite growing public support for LGBTQIA+ rights—evidenced by a sharp rise 
in favorable attitudes toward equal rights and civil unions—the humanitarian 
needs of queer individuals remain insufficiently ad essed within broader 
displacement and relief efforts
276 Internally displaced LGBTQIA+ people face a 
unique convergence of risks, including increased exposure to violence, housing 
discrimination, limited access to trans-affirming healthc e, economic hardship, 
and challenges related to legal gender recognition and military restrictions.
277 
Ongoing support from LGBTQIA+ rights NGOs—particularly through shelter 
provision, legal aid, healthcare access, and emergency relief—has been vital. 
However, these efforts a e under-resourced, and activists report growing burnout 
and capacity strains.
278   
Food and basic service delivery and assistance
Provision and access to basic services
LGBTQIA+ individuals in Ukraine continue to face significant discrimination that
limits their access to essential services such as healthcare and shelter. 
271  KII 8, NGO staff working with IDPs; FGD 40, with IDPs, Vinnytsia oblas
272  FGD 40, with IDPs, Vinnytsia oblast
273  Ilko Kucheriv Democratic Initiatives Foundation. 2020. Human rights compliance assessment. 
274  Maryna Shevtsova. 2024. Queering Displacement: The State of the Ukrainian LGBTQ+ Community 
During the Russian Full-Scale Invasion. 
275  Ipsos. 2023. LGBT+ Pride Study 2023 Global Survey. 
276  Kyiv International Sociology Institute. 2023. Perception of LGBT People and Their Rights in 
Ukraine: Results of a Telephone Survey. 
277  Gender in Detail. 2023. Transgender people in Ukraine during a full-scale war. 
278  Maryna Shevtsova. 2024. Queering Displacement: The State of the Ukrainian LGBTQ+ 
Community During the Russian Full-Scale Invasion.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  94
As the conflict xacerbates economic hardship and takes a toll on mental health, 
community members have reported a rise in GBV. Many have also been forcibly 
displaced after being evicted from their homes due to their sexual orientation 
or gender identity, further increasing the demand for shelter and humanitarian 
assistance.
279 However, community members often avoid shelters established by 
authorities or NGOs due to fear of stigma and discrimination, as their identities are 
more likely to be visible in these spaces.
280
As for medical care, the shortage of doctors not only limits general access to 
family doctors but also creates specific challenges for t ansgender individuals. 
For example, obtaining the F64.0 diagnosis – classified in the ICD-10 as gender 
identity disorder in adolescence and adulthood” and required for legal gender 
recognition and access to hormone therapy –
281has become increasingly difficult
Respondents highlighted that Territorial Recruitment Centres have an unwritten 
rule preventing transgender women from receiving this diagnosis, severely 
impacting their ability to update legal documents, find empl yment, and access 
medical treatment, including hormone therapy.
282 The financial burden of seeking 
care from private doctors further limits access to essential services. People living in 
occupied areas face even greater barriers in accessing essential medical services, 
including hormonal therapy for transgender individuals.
Provision and access to assistance 
Humanitarian assistance primarily addresses basic needs such as cash transfers, 
food, and shelter, yet stigma remains a significant barrier for LGBTQIA+ individuals, 
who struggle to access housing, healthcare, and livelihood support.
283 The ongoing 
demand for essentials like food, hygiene products, medical care, and psychological 
assistance highlights the instability many still face.
284 A representative from an 
NGO working with the community emphasized that the ongoing demand for basic 
needs is concerning, as it indicates that many individuals have not been able to 
stabilize their living conditions.
285
Members of the LGBTQIA+ community prefer to interact with organizations 
founded by LGBTQIA+ individuals or those with a history of working with the 
community. This is because LGBTQIA+ organizations know their needs and have 
developed specialized approaches to working with the community, prioritizing 
safety through online application forms, social media outreach, and targeted 
279  KII 5, NGO staff working with PLHIV/AIDS & GBTQIA+ 
280  KII 2 and 11, NGO staff working with GBT QIA+ and UN HIV/AIDS staff
281  ICD-10. F-64: Gender identity disorders. 
282  FGD 34, with LGBTQIA+, Kyiv oblast
283  OCHA. 2024. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2024. 
284  FGD 34, with LGBTQIA+, Kyiv oblast; KII 2, NGO staff working with PLHIV/AIDS & GBTQIA+
285  KII 2, NGO staff working with PLHIV/AIDS & GBTQIA+
PAGE  95
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
engagement in mobile apps. However, a significant portion of aid equests still 
comes through personal networks, where community members inform one 
another about available support.
286
Members of the LGBTQIA+ community may choose to seek state assistance when 
it does not require physical presence, such as registering for displaced people 
allowances (IDP allowances). This reduces their barrier to accessing assistance 
because they are not required to disclose their sexual identity. 
If I submit an application online, I can write anything. 
Applying depends on the honesty of the person. I could 
present myself as cisgender or anything else to receive aid. 
They won’t check—you just fill out a Google form, and they 
process it and send the aid by mail. They won’t verify who 
you really are. 
FGD 34, with LGBTQIA+, Kyiv oblast
Although some organisations do not includeLGBTQIA+ individuals, as a 
vulnerability criteria, it has been reported that including them as a separate 
category is not a viable solution, as many prefer not to disclose this information. 
However, recognizing LGBTQIA+ individuals as a specific vulne ability group could 
help ensure that their distinct protection needs – such as exposure to gender-
based violence, legal discrimination, and social exclusion – are not overlooked in 
humanitarian response planning. At the same time, explicitly targeting LGBTQIA+ 
individuals as a vulnerability criterion may inadvertently increase their exposure 
to discrimination and security risks, particularly in hostile or conservative 
environments. This could discourage individuals from seeking aid and potentially 
compromise their safety.
Instead, assistance should be channelled through organizations already working 
with or founded by the LGBTQIA+ community, as these groups are better 
positioned to provide support in a discreet and context sensitive manner.
287 For 
organizations already working with these communities, providing aid in occupied 
territories is particularly challenging. They cannot send physical humanitarian aid, 
nor can they transfer financial assistance, as bank ca ds and PayPal transactions 
are blocked.
288 In regions affected y active hostilities, delivering aid is equally 
difficult due to ongoing shelling, which m es it dangerous to reach regional 
286  Ibid
287  Ibid
288  FGD 34, with LGBTQIA+, Kyiv oblast
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  96
centres. Additionally, curfews further disrupt logistics for organizations operating 
in these areas.
The same applies to the duration of the curfew. Relatively 
speaking, this difference of one hour does not seem 
significant, but in reality, ground transport ceases 
operations after 8 p.m., with only the underground running 
until 10:30 p.m. Therefore, logistical barriers also exist in 
regions affected by active hostilities. 
KII 2 with an NGO representative working with PLHIV/AIDS & 
LGBTQIA+
Organizations supporting the LGBTQIA+ community adapt their programming to 
ensure that beneficiaries ac oss the country, including those in areas where they 
do not have a direct presence, can access assistance. For instance, organizations 
focused on these communities extend support to regions without established 
LGBTQIA+ organizations by providing food vouchers via email or offering emote IT 
courses in web design, hairdressing, cooking, and accounting.
They also operate specialized shelters for LGBTQIA+ individuals where residents 
receive clothing assistance, power banks, flashlights for p wer outages, and 
generators.
289 They also distribute food certificates, hy iene items, and winter 
clothing to beneficiaries outside the shelters. Some also provide vocational training 
and retraining programs, which are in high demand. Mental health support 
is another key area of focus, with psychological counselling provided in many 
large cities and made accessible both remotely and in person.
290 However, some 
LGBTQIA+ community members expressed dissatisfaction with the psychological 
counselling offe ed by aid organizations.
291
Economy and livelihoods
Access to jobs
Discrimination in employment remains a significant barrier for members of
the LGBTQIA+ community in Ukraine. Similar to other cisgender men, gay and 
bisexual men often struggle to secure official emp yment unless they can present 
documentation confirming xemption from military service, leading many to opt 
289  KII 2, NGO staff working with PLHIV/AIDS & GBTQIA+; KII 5, NGO staff working with PLHIV
AIDS & LGBTQIA+
290  Ibid
291  FGD 34, with LGBTQIA+, Kyiv oblast
PAGE  97
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
for informal or remote work instead. Transgender individuals face additional 
obstacles, as many have outdated documents due to the difficulty of obtaining th
F64.0 diagnosis required for legal gender recognition.
While Ukraine’s Labor Code officially bans discrimination based on xual 
orientation and gender identity, there are no real enforcement mechanisms. 
Employers do not openly reject candidates for these reasons, since it is illegal, but 
often justify their decisions by claiming the person lacks experience.
292 
A regulation of non-discrimination based on sexual 
orientation and gender identity exists formally in the Labor 
Code of Ukraine. Unfortunately, there are no real and 
substantial mechanisms for the protection of LGBTQIA+ 
people in cases of discrimination at the workplace.
KII 5 with an NGO representative working with PLHIV/AIDS & 
LGBTQIA+ communities
Despite these challenges, the service industry—including public catering, sales, 
and real estate rental—tends to be the most accepting sector for LGBTQIA+ 
individuals. However, not all members of the community work in this field
293
Community structure and meaningful participation
Information, knowledge management, and community feedback
To improve their chances of receiving aid, individuals often register with multiple 
organizations. In urban areas, registration is primarily conducted online; however, 
phishing and spam links have become more common, so individuals need to be 
more cautious.
294
Despite strong internal networks, awareness of available aid remains limited 
within the LGBTQIA+ community. While close-knit groups facilitate support, they 
also restrict the spread of information beyond immediate circles. To address this 
gap, a structured referral system and greater operational sensitivity among NGOs 
is needed. Experienced organizations working with these communities are working 
to improve access by training social workers from other organizations on inclusion, 
aiming to enhance their understanding of LGBTQIA+ needs and improve their 
292  Ibid
293  KII 2, NGO staff working with PLHIV/AIDS & GBTQIA+
294  Ibid
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  98
service provision.295 However, many LGBTQIA+ organizations lack the resources 
necessary to scale these efforts effective .
Concerns about privacy and confidentiality further limit access to assistance. Many
LGBTQIA+ individuals are reluctant to share personal or passport information 
due to fears of being outed, particularly within their families and communities. 
As such, individuals prefer to provide the minimum information required to 
receive assistance and may even opt out of aid if disclosure requirements are too 
extensive.
296 
For many LGBTQIA+ people, it is an issue provide their 
personal or passport data or provide more detail about 
their families. Since LGBTQIA+ people may hide this 
information from their families. It means the members of 
their families may not know about their sexual orientation 
or gender identity. This applies both to relations between 
children and parents, husband and wife. 
KII 2 with an NGO representative working with PLHIV/AIDS & 
LGBTQIA+
Decision making
While LGBTQIA+ organizations strive to involve community members in decision-
making, they recognize that gaps persist.297 There is a need for humanitarian 
organizations and aid providers to establish clear, actionable inclusion policies 
rather than relying on broad commitments that lack implementation.
298 State social 
services, in particular, struggle with a lack of structured policies and frameworks 
to effectively support the GBTQIA+ community. Although non-discrimination 
regulations exist, there is little practical guidance on how to enforce them.
Conflict dynamics
Social cohesion 
Many LGBTQIA+ individuals avoid participating in broader social processes out of 
fear that their identities will be revealed, leading to stigma and discrimination.299 
Some organizations engaging directly with these communities work to strengthen 
social cohesion and create safer spaces.
295  Ibid
296  Ibid
297  Ibid
298  Ibid
299  Ibid
PAGE  99
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
One way to assess how well the LGBTQIA+ community is integrated into society is 
through reactions to Pride events. While these events serve as a visible measure 
of acceptance, they also attract hostility, especially in places like Kharkiv, where 
LGBTQIA+ gatherings frequently lead to online hate speech and, in some cases, 
hate-motivated crimes.
300
Stigmatization from the outside, and violations of rights, 
aggression, attacks—unfortunately from other people, 
community representatives, right-wing radicals, and so on. 
Unfortunately, there is also physical violence in this case.
 KII 5 with an NGO representative working with PLHIV/AIDS & 
LGBTQIA+ communities
To overcome these issues, organizations working with these communities actively 
work to strengthen social cohesion through various initiatives such as bringing 
together local LGBTQIA+ representatives and internally displaced people to foster 
stronger community connections and running community centers.
301
Protection risks
Community safety
For the LGBTQIA+ community, safety concerns go beyond the broader risks of 
war. Some members feel comfortable expressing their identities, while others fear 
harassment and violence. Transgender individuals often experience verbal abuse, 
with strangers yelling at them on the street, asking intrusive questions like, “Are 
you a boy or a girl?”. In some cases, this escalates into physical assault, with men 
more likely to be violent and women, often resorting to public shaming. Simply 
displaying LGBTQIA+ symbols can also make individuals a target for aggression.
302
Despite these threats, many community members avoid reporting incidents to the 
police, fearing discrimination or retaliation. Previous negative experiences have 
made them distrustful of law enforcement.
300  KII 2, NGO staff working with PLHIV/AIDS & GBTQIA+
301  Ibid
302  FGD 34, with LGBTQIA+, Kyiv oblast
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  100
Turning to law enforcement agencies is, in general, at the 
level of fantasy, due to having either a previous negative 
experience or actually fearing that they will have a 
negative experience disclosing their sexual orientation or 
gender identity.
KII 2 with an NGO representative working with PLHIV/AIDS & 
LGBTQIA+
Beyond public harassment, LGBTQIA+ individuals face serious risks within their 
own homes. If their sexual orientation or gender identity is revealed, they may 
experience abuse, be forced out of their homes, or be cut off financial . The 
full-scale invasion has made these situations worse, leaving many with few 
alternatives. In some cases, individuals remain in abusive relationships simply 
because they have nowhere else to go.
For gay, bisexual, and transgender men, military service presents another layer of 
risk. During evaluations by the medical commission for military conscriptions, their 
sexual orientation or gender identity can be exposed, which may expose them to 
discrimination.
While humanitarian aid is meant to support people in vulnerable situations, it can 
sometimes do more harm than good – particularly when services are provided in 
ways that reinforce stigma. This is a particular concern in medical settings, where 
discrimination can prevent people from accessing essential care.
PAGE  101
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
If they are not inclusive of LGBTQIA+ people—if, 
conventionally speaking, a gynaecologist tells a lesbian 
experiencing a sexual health problem that it’s because 
she does not have sex with men—it will obviously hurt 
more than help. Or if we are talking about services where, 
during their provision, for example, the sexual orientation 
or gender identity of a person was revealed. This can be a 
situation in shelters when humanitarian aid is provided. 
KII 2 with an NGO representative working with PLHIV/AIDS & 
LGBTQIA+
When transgender people go to a medical facility, they 
might announce their name or even shout it out while 
they’re in the hallway. There’s a transgender man standing 
there, and they call out, ‘Yana! Come in,’ for example. 
That’s already bullying. This happens frequently in medical 
institutions. 
KII 2 with an NGO representative working with PLHIV/AIDS & 
LGBTQIA+
These cases underscore the importance of ensuring that LGBTQIA+ individuals 
have access to medical facilities and personnel who provide inclusive and 
supportive care.
To prevent aid distributions from putting recipients at risk, organizations working 
with LGBTQIA+ communities have strict security measures in place. They also 
carefully screen individuals before providing them with distribution addresses to 
ensure beneficiaries’ safet .
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  102
If a person comes to us for the first time, we provide an 
address where people can come only if we have checked 
them to see if they are on the blacklist, or we also look 
at their social media. If we see that a person just created 
an Instagram and Facebook page yesterday without 
photos, then he or she could very well be a fake person. 
Unfortunately, there are different organizations, including 
right-wing radical ones. It is better for us to refuse such 
a person and not let them in. So, security is also very 
important. 
KII 5 with an NGO representative working with PLHIV/AIDS & 
LGBTQIA+ communities
In addition to these precautions, anonymous communication, including 
interactions with accounts that have unclear avatars or nicknames, is 
accommodated to build trust and ensure accessibility. Furthermore, services are 
scheduled at times that align with clients’ safety concerns and work schedules, 
including evenings and late hours. This fl xibility reflects an understanding of
the unique vulnerabilities and realities faced by the LGBTQIA+ community.
303 
LGBTQIA+ focused organizations also prioritize minimizing exposure to risk by 
offering as many services emote as possible. This includes psychological support, 
legal assistance, and peer-to-peer advice, as well as electronic food and hygiene 
certificates
304
To help address challenges related to the feeling of insecurity, organizations 
working with LGBTQIA+ individuals prioritize creating safe spaces where 
community members can access support without fear of discrimination or 
hostility. Community centres operate on principles of equality, safety, and 
inclusion, ensuring an environment free from stigma. They take a sex-positive 
approach, encouraging open discussions about LGBTQIA+ needs and experiences 
without judgment. Events and services are tailored to the specific needs of the
community, making them both relevant and inclusive. Furthermore, to enhance 
this group’s sense of safety they also hold webinars on how to behave if they 
were to be confronted by the Territorial Centres of Recruitment and how to act in 
diffe ent situations.
305
303  KII 2, NGO staff working with PLHIV/AIDS & GBTQIA+
304  KII 5, NGO staff working with PLHIV/AIDS & GBTQIA+
305  Ibid
PAGE  103
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
It is mandatory, because there are different situations 
with them, and you need to understand how to behave, 
where to go, and when it’s a situation where your rights are 
definitely being violated 100%.
KII 5 with an NGO representative working with PLHIV/AIDS & 
LGBTQIA+ communities
People Living with HIV/AIDS 
Demographics and Current Humanitarian Situation 
According to the Ukrainian Ministry of Health, the largest group affected y HIV/
AIDS in Ukraine consists of people who use drugs, followed by men who have 
sex with men (MSM), LGBTQIA+, individuals, sex workers, prisoners, and former 
prisoners.306 Partners of people who inject drugs are also considered a key affected
subgroup.307 
In recent years, Ukraine has made significant strides in combating HIV/AIDS,
with a 47 percent decrease in new HIV infections and an 81 percent reduction 
in AIDS-related mortality prior to the Russian invasion.308 As of 2023, 158,803 
people live with HIV/AIDS.309 Despite disruptions caused by the war, the country 
has managed to resume its HIV/AIDS response, with 118,348 patients receiving 
antiretroviral therapy (ART) by the end of 2023 – only slightly below pre-war levels.310 
Encouragingly, the first nine months of 2023 saw a 40.8 pe cent increase in HIV 
testing, indicating continued efforts to maintain access to essential healthca e 
services.311
However, the war in Ukraine has disrupted healthcare systems, posing severe 
challenges for people living with HIV/AIDS (PLHIV). The displacement of healthcare 
professionals specializing in HIV treatment has also strained service provision and 
made it more difficult for ganizations to deliver consistent support. 312 
306  Ibid
307  Ibid
308   UNAIDS. 2024.  UNAIDS response to the crisis in Ukraine.
309  WHO. 2023. On the frontline of the fight against HIV: Ukraine's resilience and WHO's support.
 UNAIDS. 2024.  UNAIDS response to the crisis in Ukraine.
310  UNAIDS. 2024.  UNAIDS response to the crisis in Ukraine.
311  Ibid
312  Cox. 2024. Ukraine keeps up the fight against HIV while fighting a war.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  104
Provision and access to basic services and resources
The escalation of the invasion has affected PLHIV and people who inject drugs
(PWID) diffe ently depending on their social status. These vulnerabilities are 
further compounded in displacement, as the disruption of social networks and 
barriers to services in host communities increase their exposure to risk and further 
limit their access to support.
313
Among the most pressing issues faced by this group are access to healthcare and 
shelter.
314 While some shelters offer specialized suppor  for PLHIV, access remains 
limited. Discrimination in displacement settings, along with limited access to 
traditional support networks among displaced and host communities, continues to 
deter individuals from seeking help.
315 
The shortage of doctors has reduced access to family doctors, leading some to rely 
on private care, where high costs can further restrict access to essential services. 
Additionally, healthcare professionals with expertise in managing HIV have left 
the country, which creates challenges for organizations working with these 
populations, as it reduces the availability of specialized care and limits referral 
options.
316
For PLHIV, concerns over confidentiality of medical ecords persist, with reports of 
sensitive health statuses being disclosed publicly. Respondents also highlighted 
long waiting times and bureaucratic obstacles, particularly for oncology patients. 
Many noted that patients often have to advocate for themselves to receive proper 
documentation and treatment.
317
In occupied areas, people face severe barriers to accessing essential medical care. 
The conflict has also eportedly contributed to a rise in opioid injections due to 
stress in regions heavily affected y hostilities, further increasing the risk of HIV 
transmission.
318 
Provision and access to assistance
The Ukrainian Public Health Centre, in collaboration with NGOs, has established 
minimum standards of support for PLHIV. These standards cover medical, 
social, and psychosocial services but remain basic, with considerable room for 
improvement to ensure comprehensive and sustainable care.
319 As the war in 
313  OCHA. 2024. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2024. 
314  OCHA. 2024. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2024. 
315  UNAIDS. 2024. UNAIDS response to the crisis in Ukraine.
316  Cox. September 2024. Ukraine keeps up the fight against HIV while fighting a war.
317  FGD 25, with PLHIV/AIDS, Mykolaiv oblast
318  Cox. September 2024. Ukraine keeps up the fight against HIV while fighting a war. 
319  KII 11, IO staff
PAGE  105
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Ukraine continues, strengthening HIV/AIDS programs and ensuring inclusive 
humanitarian responses that address the specific challenges faced y PLHIV in 
Ukraine is crucial.
PLHIV, MSM, and PWID primarily access assistance through NGOs that specialize 
in supporting them. They tend to rely on dedicated organizations and are unlikely 
to seek help from other NGOs, even when relevant humanitarian programs are 
available in their area. Familiarity with an NGO plays a crucial role in whether 
individuals seek or remain engaged in support programs. If an organization has 
not previously worked with HIV-positive individuals, potential beneficiaries may
fear that accessing its services could expose their status, leading them to avoid 
assistance altogether.
320 
Economy and livelihoods
Similar to the experiences of LGBTQIA+ community members, many HIV-positive 
individuals fear disclosing their status in the workplace due to concerns about 
negative consequences or dismissal.
321 
Community structure and meaningful participation
Similar to LGBTQIA+ members, concerns about privacy and confidentiality limit
access to assistance. However, for PLHIV, access to essential medical treatments 
such as ART therapy, HIV treatment, and pre-contact HIV prevention requires 
passport data, as these services are provided through medical facilities.
322 This 
makes it especially important for medical centers to be trained and specialized 
in working with PLHIV, to avoid stigma or insensitivity in service provision. When 
healthcare providers are not adequately trained, individuals may feel unsafe or 
disrespected, which can lead them to avoid seeking care altogether.
Protection risks
Community safety
PLHIV face similar challenges to those experienced by members of the LGBTQIA+ 
community in medical settings, where stigma and a lack of understanding 
from healthcare providers can discourage them from seeking care. Just as with 
LGBTQIA+ individuals, access to inclusive, confidential, and espectful treatment is 
crucial. This highlights the importance of working with specialized organizations 
that understand this group’s specific needs and vulne abilities.
320  KII 11, IO staff; FGD 25, with PLHIV/AIDS, My olaiv oblast
321  FulcrumUA. 2024. (Non)discrimination of LGBTQI+ people in the workplace and inclusive labor 
market results of a national survey of the LGBTQI+ community. 
322  KII 5, NGO staff working with PLHIV/AIDS & GBTQIA+
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  106
HIV-positive individuals serving in the military face also face challenges in 
accessing HIV-related medical services, particularly antiretroviral therapy.323 Stigma 
surrounding HIV status poses a barrier for service members needing treatment, 
as many are afraid to disclose their status or seek medical care due to fears of 
being identified. In other cases, fear of being mobilized has led some to stop
treatement altogether in an attempt to alter their medical classification and avoid
conscription.
 324  
323  KII 2, NGO staff working with PLHIV/AIDS & GBTQIA+; KII 5, NGO staff working with PLHIV
AIDS & LGBTQIA+
324  KII 5, NGO staff working with PLHIV/AIDS & GBTQIA+
PAGE  107
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Conclusion
& Recommendations
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  108
CONCLUSION & RECOMMENDATIONS
As Ukraine enters its fifth year of the full-scale invasion, the conflict continues to 
impact key infrastructure, essential services, and the well-being of its people. Mass 
displacement, psychological distress, and shifts in international aid priorities 
further complicate the humanitarian response. In this dynamic context, a 
comprehensive understanding of conditions on the ground, including the diverse 
struggles and needs of individuals, particularly those in hard-to-reach 
communities, remains crucial for informing humanitarian efforts.
The I-CARA contributes to this understanding by offering a detailed pictu e of the 
humanitarian landscape in Ukraine. It highlights disparities in access to services, 
protection risks, and the diverse needs of women, men, and people in vulnerable 
situations. The analysis of the threat’s vulnerabilities and coping mechanisms 
across diffe ent groups provides a foundation to design more effective and
inclusive humanitarian programming. These insights are intended to support 
inclusive, context-sensitive programming, improving aid delivery, strengthening 
inclusion and accountability, and addressing both immediate needs and longer-
term resilience.
The following summary reflects the perspectives and xperiences shared by 
participants in focus group discussions and key informant interviews conducted 
as part of the I-CARA assessment. These insights do not constitute an evaluation 
of the work of WFP or any other humanitarian organization. They are intended 
to inform understanding of the humanitarian context in Ukraine and should 
be interpreted as indicative of community perceptions rather than definitive
assessments of institutional performance.
Improving access to humanitarian aid 
Access to humanitarian aid remains a critical concern across Ukraine, particularly 
in frontline and rural areas. While in-kind assistance continues to play a vital role 
where markets are disrupted, many affected individuals face sign ficant barriers to
accessing aid. These include long curfews, damaged infrastructure, limited public 
transportation, and digital literacy challenges. Vulnerable groups, such as older 
people, persons with disabilities, and Roma communities, are disproportionately 
affected, often lacking the documentation or technological means required to 
register for assistance. Older persons reported discontinuing medical treatments 
due to unaffo dable costs, while those with mobility challenges rely heavily on local 
community support to access essentials like water and food. Roma communities 
living in compact settlements face acute challenges in accessing water, gas, and 
shelter, often resorting to collecting fi ewood for heating due to inadequate 
infrastructure and lack of formal service provision.
PAGE  109
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Cash assistance is widely preferred for its fl xibility, enabling recipients to prioritize 
urgent needs like food, rent, and medicine. However, logistical constraints and 
eligibility criteria can limit its reach. Community members consistently emphasized 
the importance of maintaining both cash and in-kind modalities to ensure inclusive 
coverage, especially in high-risk and underserved areas.
Enhancing accountability and communication 
Humanitarian communication efforts in Uk aine utilize a broad mix of digital and 
traditional channels, including social media, SMS, radio, and billboards. Despite 
these efforts, many espondents reported confusion regarding eligibility criteria, 
registration procedures, and aid availability. This was especially true for individuals 
with limited digital access or literacy. Older persons and individuals with 
disabilities, particularly those with hearing impairments or outdated devices, face 
compounded challenges in navigating digital platforms. This digital exclusion not 
only limits access to information but also hinders registration for aid and feedback 
mechanisms.
Direct communication, via phone calls, hotlines, and face-to-face interactions, 
was consistently preferred, particularly in rural and frontline communities. These 
methods were seen as more reliable and accessible, helping to build trust and 
reduce misunderstandings.
Feedback mechanisms are in place but vary in effectiveness. While platforms
like Viber and Telegram are commonly used, concerns about anonymity and 
responsiveness persist. Many participants expressed a desire for more inclusive 
and transparent processes, noting that unclear targeting and perceived favouritism 
can undermine community trust. There was also a strong call for more dignified
aid delivery, such as allowing recipients to choose items or reducing the visibility of 
aid collection.
Adopting inclusive and conflict-sensitive targeting
The assessment revealed that perceptions of fairness in aid distribution are closely 
tied to transparency and community involvement. While targeting frameworks are 
informed by needs assessments and government coordination, many community 
members felt excluded from decision-making processes. This sense of exclusion 
was particularly pronounced among marginalized groups, including Roma 
communities, LGBTQIA+ individuals, and people with disabilities.
Documentation requirements and digital registration systems were frequently 
cited as barriers, especially for displaced individuals and those lacking formal 
identification. Participants emphasized the importance of flexible targeting 
approaches that account for diverse vulnerabilities, including those not easily
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  110
captured by standard criteria. For example, older persons willing and able to 
work reported experiencing age discrimination, while Roma individuals described 
altering their appearance to avoid ethnic profiling. These insights highlight the
need for more nuanced vulnerability assessments that extend beyond formal 
documentation and digital registration systems.
Efforts to imp ove inclusion, such as outreach through community leaders and 
tailored communication, were appreciated but not uniformly experienced. The 
findings suggest that continued attention to inclusive ta geting is essential to 
ensure that assistance reaches those most in need, while minimizing social 
tensions and perceptions of inequity.
Safeguarding
Safety and dignity in aid delivery emerged as key concerns, particularly in regions 
affected y active hostilities. Overcrowded distribution points, long wait times, and 
exposure to security risks, such as shelling, were cited as challenges. Mitigation 
measures, including scheduled appointments, door-to-door deliveries, and 
discreet distribution methods, were seen as effective in enhancing safety and
reducing stigma.
Protection risks vary across groups. For example, LGBTQIA+ individuals and 
people living with HIV/AIDS reported avoiding public shelters due to fears of 
discrimination or identity exposure. Similarly, Roma women described cultural 
norms that limit their mobility and access to services. These insights underscore 
the importance of context-sensitive approaches that prioritize safety, privacy, and 
dignity, particularly for groups facing compounded risks due to discrimination, 
mobility limitations, or social stigma.
Expanding livelihood opportunities 
The war has significantly disrupted livelihoods, with widesp ead unemployment 
and economic instability affecting both displaced and host communities. While
some industries have relocated to safer areas, job opportunities remain limited, 
especially in rural regions and among older adults, women with caregiving 
responsibilities, and people with disabilities.
Many respondents reported relying on informal work, remittances, and 
humanitarian assistance to meet basic needs. Vocational training and reskilling 
programs were identified as valuable pathways to economic ecovery, particularly 
for displaced individuals and women entering new roles as household 
breadwinners.
However, structural barriers, such as age discrimination, lack of childcare, and
PAGE  111
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
limited access to formal education, continue to hinder employment. Participants 
emphasized the need for sustained support to rebuild livelihoods and reduce 
dependence on aid. Roma and LGBTQIA+ individuals, as well as people living with 
HIV, expressed a preference for working with specialized organizations founded 
by or closely connected to their communities, citing greater understanding and 
tailored support.
Strengthening protection and inclusion 
Protection risks are shaped by both conflict dynamics and social xclusion. 
Displaced individuals, LGBTQIA+ communities, Roma people, and persons with 
disabilities face heightened vulnerabilities, including discrimination, limited access 
to services, and exposure to violence. These risks are compounded by stigma, 
limited availability of specialized support, and gaps in legal protections.
Participants highlighted the importance of inclusive service provision, noting that 
assistance delivered through trusted organizations, particularly those led by or 
working closely with marginalized groups, was more likely to be accessed and 
valued. Ensuring confidentialit , cultural sensitivity, and tailored support were seen 
as essential to fostering inclusion and reducing harm.
Fostering community cohesion and social integration 
Social cohesion in Ukraine has evolved throughout the conflict, with initial tensions
between displaced and host communities gradually giving way to solidarity and 
mutual support. Informal networks, such as neighbors sharing food or helping 
with daily tasks, play a vital role in sustaining resilience.
However, perceived inequities in aid distribution and diffe ences in language, 
political views, or cultural norms can still fuel mistrust. Displaced individuals 
reported both positive and negative experiences integrating into new 
communities, with some forming strong bonds and others facing exclusion 
or suspicion. Roma communities reported persistent ethnic discrimination, 
including limited access to public services and social exclusion. Some individuals 
even described altering their appearance to avoid being identified as Roma,
underscoring the depth of stigma and barriers to integration. Persons with 
disabilities and older adults also highlighted their reliance on informal networks 
for daily support, an essential lifeline that may not be sustainable without formal 
inclusion mechanisms.
Efforts to p omote inclusive community engagement, such as joint activities, 
shared work initiatives, and culturally sensitive programming, were seen as 
effective in bridging divides and st engthening the social fabric. These findings
highlight the importance of fostering trust and collaboration at the local level to
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  112
support long-term recovery and integration.
Evolving Gender and Social Norms 
The conflict has significantly eshaped gender roles and social expectations across 
Ukraine. Women have increasingly assumed roles as primary breadwinners 
and caregivers, often balancing informal work with household responsibilities 
in the absence of male family members. Despite the increasing burden of 
responsibilities, many women reported feeling unprepared for these new roles, 
citing limited opportunities to acquire new professions or necessary qualifications.
Inadequate childcare support further compounds these challenges, particularly for 
internally displaced women, who face additional barriers to securing employment. 
Meanwhile, men face heightened protection risks due to conscription, which 
limits their mobility and access to formal employment. The requirement for 
military documentation to engage in formal employment discourages many 
from registering for assistance or seeking stable jobs, contributing to a sense of 
vulnerability. Although men did not explicitly describe themselves as isolated, 
the fear of conscription and avoidance of formal systems may lead to social 
and economic marginalization over time. These shifts have introduced new 
vulnerabilities and coping strategies, while simultaneously challenging traditional 
gender and social norms. Participants emphasized the need for continued support 
that acknowledges these evolving dynamics and promotes equitable access to 
opportunities and services.
Localization and the role of national and local actors 
As humanitarian operations in Ukraine increasingly transition from emergency 
relief to resilience-focused programming, the role of national and local actors 
has become more prominent. The decentralization of aid delivery, through 
oblast, raion, and hromada-level structures, has enabled more context-specific
responses, but also introduced challenges related to capacity, coordination, and 
consistency. While local NGOs and authorities are often well-positioned to identify 
needs and deliver assistance, participants noted that their ability to lead and 
influence st ategic decisions remains limited. Strengthening collaboration between 
international and local actors, while ensuring that cross-cutting priorities such as 
inclusion, safeguarding, and accountability are maintained, will be essential to 
sustaining effective humanitarian action in the volving Ukrainian context.
PAGE  113
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Annexes
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  114
ANNEXES
Annex A. Analytical Framework
Component Subcomponent Indicator
Data collection 
mode
DR KII FGD
Demo-
graphics
Regular and hard-to 
reach audiences
•
 D
emographic composition and size 
of each group
•
 A
ge/gender distribution
✔ ✔
Service de -
livery and 
assistance
Provision and 
access to basic ser-
vices and resourc-
es (e.g., shelter, 
education, health, 
water, electricity, 
gas, transportation, 
community assets, 
financial services, 
land ownership 
etc.)
•
 P
rovision and access to basic ser-
vices and resources (e.g., shelter, 
education, health, water, electrici -
ty, gas, transportation, community 
assets , financial services, land 
ownership etc.) Capacity of the dif-
ferent communities to meet family 
needs (housing/shelter, household 
items, water, hygiene, and winter)
•
 B
asic service needs/preferences of 
affected people
•
 G
roups of people facing challenges 
in accessing resources
•
 R
easons for the exclusion of 
certain groups of people from 
accessing resources
•
 E
xistence of community rules and 
laws that prevent certain people 
from accessing resources
•
 D
ifferences in access and participa-
tion in the design of basic service 
delivery
✔ ✔ ✔
Food security and 
coping strategies
•
 P
rofile of food-insecure or vul-
nerable groups of people
•
 C
auses of food insecurity
•
 D
ynamics of the development of 
the food insecurity situation
•
 C
oping strategies for addressing 
food insecurity
✔ ✔ ✔
Provision and ac-
cess to assistance
•
 M
echanisms for receiving assis-
tance 
•
 (
Potential) obstacles or problems 
faced accessing assistance or 
participating in humanitarian 
activities across the di fferent 
communities
•
 I
dentify groups of people exclud-
ed from receiving assistance and 
the drivers of their exclusion 
•
 M
itigation measures to ensure 
equal access to assistance 
•
 I
nstances of favor-based humani -
tarian assistance distributions
•
 D
ifferences in access and partici-
pation in the design of assistance 
provided
✔ ✔ ✔
PAGE  115
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Component Subcomponent Indicator
Data collection 
mode
DR KII FGD
Economy 
and liveli-
hoods
Access to jobs
•
 E
mployment status, sector of 
work, type of work (full/part-
time)
•
 B
arriers to employment
✔ ✔ ✔
Human, social, nat -
ural, physical, and 
financial capital
•
 D
ependence on social network
•
 L
ivelihood coping strategies ✔ ✔ ✔
Communi-
ty struc-
ture and 
meaningful 
participa -
tion
Information and 
knowledge manage -
ment
•
 A
wareness of sources of infor -
mation about di fferent forms of 
assistance
✔ ✔ ✔
Decision-making 
processes
•
 H
ealth and well-being decision 
makers within the di fferent com-
munities 
✔ ✔
Community feed -
back and response
•
 Pre
ferred channels/mechanisms 
for feedback provision
•
 Da
ta sensitivities
✔ ✔
Conflict 
dynamics
Local context and 
war dynamics
•
 O
verview of the current situation 
and developments in the local 
war dynamics
✔ ✔
Social cohesion
•
 Na
ture of relationships between 
neighbors and other community 
members
•
 D
egree of openness in communi-
ty culture
•
 L
evel of equity within the com-
munity
•
 M
ethods of con flict resolution 
within the community
✔ ✔
Conflict sensitivity
•
 C
ases of community disagree -
ment or tension caused by WFP/
other assistance
•
 I
nvolvement of WFP/other organ -
izations’ staff n war and political 
discussions
•
 I
nstances of WFP/other organ-
izations’ assistance being used 
by local leaders to in fluence or 
interfere with their political or 
economic interests
•
 L
ikelihood of WFP/other organi -
zations’ assistance being used for 
military advantage
•
 P
otential negative community im-
pacts of WFP/other organizations’ 
activities, especially on women 
and girls
✔ ✔
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  116
Component Subcomponent Indicator
Data collection 
mode
DR KII FGD
Socio-cul -
tural and 
gender 
norms
Evolving gender 
roles
•
 T
ypical roles and responsibilities 
of women, men, boys, and girls 
within the community
✔ ✔ ✔
Protection 
risks
Community safety
•
 P
erceived sense of safety
•
 Fa
ctors and locations contribut-
ing to feelings of insecurity
•
 C
oping strategies for addressing 
feelings of insecurity
•
 W
FP/other organizations’  actions 
that enhance/detract from com-
munity safety 
•
 T
ypes of protection risks a ffect-
ing women, girls, men, and boys
✔ ✔ ✔
Protection risks
•
 P
revalence of harmful practic-
es, discrimination, or violence 
against speci fic groups of people 
based on gender, age, sexual 
orientation, disability, ethnicity, 
and other characteristics
✔ ✔ ✔
Account-
ability of 
humanitar-
ian actors
Accountability to 
affected people
•
 A
wareness of targeted people 
receiving assistance of the means 
of obtaining assistance
•
 P
referred methods for accessing 
information
•
 P
referred methods for communi-
cating with WFP sta ff
•
 E
xperience of community 
involvement in decision-making 
regarding needed assistance
•
 O
ptimal ways to ensure commu-
nity voices are heard
✔ ✔
Stakehold-
er analysis 
Identification of rel-
evant stakeholders, 
and their positions 
and capacities
•
 O
verview of stakeholders, their 
activities, and the communities 
they interact with, with a focus on 
protection and gender
✔ ✔
Relationships 
among stakehold -
ers
•
 Na
ture and quality of relation -
ships between di fferent stake-
holders 
✔
PAGE  117
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Annex B. Desk Review
List of reviewed documents
ADRA Ukraine. 2023. Transportation, Psychological, Cash, and Shelter Assistance: 
How ADRA Ukraine Helps Affected Ukrainians Through the LEAP Project.
ARC. 2024. Ukraine Humanitarian Crisis: Two-Year Report.
Antikor. 2024. In the occupied Donetsk, water supplies delivered to the city have 
halved.
CARE. 2023. Ukraine Rapid Gender Analysis.
Center for International Private Enterprise. 2024. Corruption Risk Assessment: 
Humanitarian Aid in Ukraine.
CLEAR. 2024. Global Communicating about gender and violence in Ukraine.
Confederation of employers of Ukraine. 2023. The unemployment rate among able-
bodied people with disabilities reaches 85%.
Cox. 2024. Ukraine keeps up the fight against HIV while fighting a war.
FulcrumUA. 2024. (Non)discrimination of LGBTQI+ people in the workplace and 
inclusive labor market results of a national survey of the LGBTQI+ community.
GBV AoR, UNFPA. 2025. Providing GBV Services Near Frontline Areas: Key 
Considerations.
Gender in Detail. 2023. Transgender people in Ukraine during a full-scale war.
Global Conflict racker. 2025. War in Ukraine.
GPPi. 2024. Queering displacement: The state of the Ukrainian LGBTQ+ community 
during the Russian full-scale invasion (Policy Brief). Global Public Policy Institute.
ILO. 2024. How did the war impact the Ukrainian labour market?
Ilko Kucheriv Democratic Initiatives Foundation. 2020. Human rights compliance 
assessment
IMPACT. 2024. Unsafe returns: what makes refugees return to Ukraine and settle in 
the frontline areas of the country?.
Info Sapiens. 2023. Research of the economic activity of IDP women and their 
strategies regarding the restoration of the source of income.
IOM. 2024. Employment, Mobility and Labour Market Dynamics in Ukraine.
IOM. 2024. Ukraine internal displacement report, general population survey.
IOM.  2024. Ukraine IDP Allowance Update: Impact of the March 2024 Law 
Amendment on Ukraine’s Internally Displaced.
IOM. 2025. Ukraine returns report.
IOM. 2025. Ukraine Internal Displacement Report Round 19.
Ipsos. 2023. LGBT+ Pride Study 2023 Global Survey
IRC. 2024. Multisectoral Need Assessment Report.
Kharkiv Institute of Social Research. 2025. Ageism in Ukraine: round discussion.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  118
List of reviewed documents
Kiel Institute. 2025. Ukraine Support Tracker.
KIIS. 2022. Interethnic Prejudice in Ukraine.
Kyiv International Sociology Institute. 2023. Perception of LGBT People and Their 
Rights in Ukraine.
Kyiv School of Economics. 2025. Report on Damages to Infrastructure from the 
Destruction Caused by Russia’s Military Aggression Against Ukraine as of November 
2024.
Kyiv Independent. 2025. US foreign aid transformed Ukraine. Its suspension 
threatens decades of work.
List of “Women’s Rights Organizations” (WROs) operating in the Ukraine 
humanitarian response.
Ministry of Social Policy Ukraine. 2024. Main news.
Minority Rights Group. 2020. Roma in Ukraine.
NGO Resource Center - Vital Voices Global Partnership. 2023. Capacities and 
needs of women’s rights and women-led organizations in Ukraine: transformations 
during wartime.
OCHA. 2024. Ukraine Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan 2024.
OCHA, 2025. Humanitarian needs and response plan.
OSW. 2025. The US suspends foreign aid: consequences for Ukraine.
OXFAM. 2025. A Path Forward for Local Humanitarian Leadership in Ukraine.
PAX. 2025. Protection of Civilians Ukraine Briefings - Evacuations to Protect Civilians: 
Ukraine.
PSEA Network Ukraine. 2024. Ukraine Sexual Exploitation and Abuse Risk 
Assessment Report 2023.
Protection Cluster Ukraine. 2024. Overview of findings of the Protection Cluster 
Monitoring Tool on the impact of changes in payments of IDP allowance.
REACH. 2024. Multi-Sectoral Needs Assessment (MSNA): Gender, Age and Disability 
Situation Overview. 
Refugees International. 2024. Annual Ukraine Localization Survey 2024.
ReliefWeb. 2024. Update on Changes to Payment of IDP Allowance: CMU Resolution 
332.
Reyes-Urueña et al., 2023. HIV diagnoses among people born in Ukraine reported 
by EU/EEA countries in 2022: Impact on regional HIV trends and implications for 
healthcare planning.
Save the Children. 2024. Attacks on Education in Ukraine Double in 2024.
SwissInfo. 2024. Donor fatigue looms over humanitarian aid in Ukraine after two 
years
 of war.
PAGE  119
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
List of reviewed documents
The New Humanitarian. 2022. How LGBTQI+ to LGBTQI+ support is helping 
Ukrainian refugees find safety in the EU.
The League of Strong. 2025. The needs of persons with disabilities for livelihoods 
and access to the labor market in the context of war in Ukraine.
Tool 5_FGD_Gender_Menu of questions for Socio-cultural and gender norms
Tool 7_Qual Interview_Conflict Sensitivit
TOOL2_Menu of questions for Risk Assessment STEP 2
TOOL4_Focus Group Discussions
TOOL6_Stakeholder Analysis
Transparency International. 2024. Corruption Perceptions Index: Ukraine.
Ukrainian News. 2023. Water Tariffs Rising in Ukraine: What Will Be the New Prices 
from July 1.
UN WOMEN. 2024. Women’s economic empowerment in Ukraine during Russia’s 
invasion.
UNAIDS. 2024. UNAIDS response to the crisis in Ukraine.
UNAIDS. 2024. 2024 global AIDS report — The Urgency of Now : AIDS at a Crossroads.
UNAIDS. 2010. Criteria to be reached with humanitarian assistance – HIV response. 
UNHCR. 2024. Displaced themselves, and now advocating for the rights and durable 
solutions for all internally displaced in communities across Ukraine.
UNHCR, 2024. Multi-year strategy 2025-2027.
UNHCR, 2025. Ukraine situation: UNHCR’s 2025 plans and financial requirements.
UN Human Rights. 2024. Ukraine: Protection of civilians in armed conflict.
UNDP . 2024. Impact of war on youth in Ukraine. 
UNDP . 2024. Social Cohesion in Ukraine: Key Trends based on reSCORE 2024.
USAID and UNDP . 2023. A Resilient Picture: Experiences of Persons with Disabilities in 
Ukraine.
UNFPA. 2024. Ukraine Population Data.
UNICEF. 2025. Ukraine Humanitarian Situation Report No. 47.
United Nations Ukraine. 2023. Attacks on Ukraine’s Electricity Infrastructure 
Threaten Key Aspects of Life as Winter Approaches.
USDA Foreign Agricultural Service. 2022. Households Agricultural Production: Kyiv, 
Ukraine.
Voice of Romni. 2024. Voice of Romni: Identity, gender aspects, and traditions.
Vox Ukraine. 2024. Pension System in Ukraine: Citizens’ Perspective.
WFP . 2022. Ukraine transitional interim country strategic plan (2023–2024).
WFP . 2022. Gender Policy 2022.
WFP . 2021. Protection and Accountability Handbook.
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  120
List of reviewed documents
WFP . 2025. External Situation Report #57
WFP . 2024. Ukraine Annual Country Report 2023. 
WFP . 2024. Ukraine transitional interim country strategic plan (2025–2027).
WFP , FAO and KSE. 2025. Joint Food Security and Livelihood Assessment of Frontline 
and Bordering Regions in Ukraine
WHO. 2023. On the frontline of the fight against HIV: Ukraine’s resilience and WHO’s 
support.
World Bank. 2024. Ukraine - Third Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment (RDNA3) 
(Report No. P180174).
World Bank. 2024. UKRAINE Human Development Update. In Focus: Disability and 
Inclusion.
World Vision. 2024. Gender-Based Violence in Ukraine Amid War: An Assessment 
Report.
World Bank. 2024. Listening to citizens of Ukraine: the poverty and human impacts of 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
Голос Ромні. 2024. Становище ромських громад під час війни в Україні.
Annex C. Detailed breakdown of FGDs per oblast
PAGE  121
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Annex D. Anonymized lists of data collection 
participants
Key Informant Interviews (KIIs)
# Organization Date
1 NGO working with Roma communities 08.10.24
2 NGO working with PLHIV/AIDS & LGBTQIA+  08.10.24
3 Local NGO staff 10.10.24
4 NGO working with PLHIV/AIDS 15.10.24
5 NGO working with PLHIV/AIDS & LGBTQIA+ 15.10.24
6 Local government representative, Mykolaiv 15.10.24
7 Local government representative, Zaporizhzhia 17.10.24
8 NGO working with IDPs 17.10.24
9 Local government representative, Poltava 21.10.24
10 NGO working with people with disabilities 24.10.24
11 International organization representative 28.10.24
12 International organization representative 16.10.24
13 Cluster representative 24.10.24
14 INGO representative 11.11.24
15 INGO representative 24.10.24
16 Cluster representative 22.10.24
17 Cluster representative 7.11.24
18 International organization representative 30.10.24
19 INGO representative 20.11.24
20 Working group representative 26.11.24
WFP UKRAINE
PAGE  122
Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) 
FGD distribution
# Oblast Target 
Group
Location/Settlement 
Type of participants
# of 
partici-
pants
Mode Date
1 Donetsk Women
(18-59)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 20.10.24
2 Donetsk Men
(18-59)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 19.10.24
3 Donetsk Older 
women (59+)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 21.10.24
4 Donetsk Older men 
(59+)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 22.10.24
5 Kharkiv Women
(18-59) Bohodukhiv 6 Offli 01.11.24
6 Kharkiv Men
(18-59) Kamyana Yurga 6 Offli 11.11.24
7 Kharkiv Older 
women (59+) Bohodukhiv 6 Offli 01.11.24
8 Kharkiv Older men 
(59+) Chuguiv 6 Offli 31.10.24
9 Kharkiv PWD Chuguiv 6 Offli 31.10.24
10 Dnipropetrovsk Women
(18-59)
Dnipro + participants 
from Nikopol and 
Marhanets
6 Offli 23.10.24
11 Dnipropetrovsk Men
(18-59)
Dnipro + participants 
from Tomakivka 6 Offli 24.10.24
12 Dnipropetrovsk Older 
women (59+)
Dnipro + participants 
from Tomakivka 6 Offli 24.10.24
13 Dnipropetrovsk Older men 
(59+)
Dnipro + participants 
from Marhanets 6 Offli 23.10.24
14 Dnipropetrovsk
Internally 
displaced 
people
Dnipro + participants 
from Nikopol and Kvyi Rih
6 (2 in 
reserve) Offli 24.10.24
15 Dnipropetrovsk Roma 
community Marhanets 6 Remote 07.11.24
16 Zaporizhzhia Women
(18-59)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 28.10.24
17 Zaporizhzhia Men
(18-59)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 30.10.24
18 Zaporizhzhia Older 
women (59+)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 29.10.24
19 Zaporizhzhia Older men 
(59+)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 31.10.24
20 Odesa Women
(18-59) Odesa city 6 Offli 13.11.24
21 Odesa Older 
women (59+) Ovidiopil 6 Offli 08.11.24
PAGE  123
INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
# Oblast Target 
Group
Location/Settlement 
Type of participants
# of 
partici-
pants
Mode Date
22 Mykolaiv Men
(18-59)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 26.10.24
23 Mykolaiv Older men 
(59+)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 27.10.24
24 Mykolaiv
Internally 
displaced 
people
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 02.11.24
25 Mykolaiv HIV/AIDs Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 12.11.24
26 Kherson Women
(18-59)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 24.10.24
27 Kherson Older 
women (59+)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 25.20.24
28 Kherson Roma 
community Kherson city + oblast 6 Offli 09.11.24
29 Sumy Men
(18-59)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 21.10.24
30 Sumy Older men 
(59+)
Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 21.10.24
31 Kyiv Women
(18-59)
Kyiv + representatives of 
Kyivska oblast 6 Offli 18.10.24
32 Kyiv Older 
women (59+)
Kyiv + representatives of 
Kyivska oblast 6 Offli 18.10.24
33 Kyiv
Internally 
displaced 
people
Makariv 6 Offli 29.10.24
34 Kyiv LGBTQIA+ Respondents invited from 
diffe ent settlement types 6 Remote 15.11.24
35 Lviv Men
(18-59) Drohobych 6 Offli 29.10.24
36 Lviv Older men 
(59+) Sosnivka 6 Offli 05.11.24
37 Lviv People with 
disabilities Lviv 6 Offli 09.11.24
38 Vinnytsia Women
(18-59)
Vinnytsia + 
representatives of 
Vinnytsia oblast
6 Offli 16.10.24
39 Vinnytsia Older men 
(59+)
Vinnytsia + 
representatives of 
Vinnytsia oblast
6 Offli 16.10.24
40 Vinnytsia
Internally 
displaced 
people
Vinnytsia + 
representatives of 
Vinnytsia oblast
6 Offli 16.10.24
WFP UKRAINE PAGE  124
LIST OF PHOTO CREDITS
COVER 
PAGE
AI-Generated via Freepik
PAGE 8 WFP/ Sayed Asif Mahmud
PAGE 19 WFP/ Sayed Asif Mahmud
PAGE 31 WFP/ Sayed Asif Mahmud
PAGE 39 WFP/ Sayed Asif Mahmud
PAGE 107 WFP/ Sayed Asif Mahmud
PAGE 113 WFP/ Sayed Asif Mahmud
Layout, Visualization and Graphic Design: Sandra Estefane
PAGE  125INTEGRATED CROSS-CUTTING CONTEXT ANALYSIS AND RISK ASSESSMENT
For any questions or comments, please reach out to
Anastasiia Petrenko
Programme Policy Officer (Protection)
anastasiia.petrenko@wfp.org
Giada Di Maria
Programme Policy Officer, Head of Research, Assessment and Monitoring (RAM) & 
Protection, Gender and Accountability to Affected People (PGAAP)
giada.dimaria@wfp.org