The Bundibugyo virus disease (BVD) outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues to evolve rapidly, with sustained transmission and increasing numbers of reported cases. As of 17 June, a cumulative of 896 confirmed cases, including 232 deaths, have been reported from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As of 18 June, Uganda has reported 19 confirmed cases including two deaths, as well as one probable case who has died. In Uganda, the outbreak remains epidemiologically linked to transmission originating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with evidence of both imported infections and secondary transmission among contacts and healthcare workers. Uganda has not reported any new cases since 5 June 2026. National authorities in the two affected countries, in collaboration with WHO and partners, are implementing an extensive set of response measures. A regional preparedness and prioritization framework continues to guide readiness activities across the African Region.


Since the last 
Disease Outbreak News
 was published on 13 June 2026, the number of confirmed cases and deaths have increased rapidly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In total, 915 confirmed cases; 896 from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and 19 from Uganda; and 234 deaths including two from Uganda, have been reported. At least 88 patients have recovered from the disease; 78 patients from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and 10 patients from Uganda.


Figure 1. Distribution of confirmed cases of Bundibugyo virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as of 17 June; and Uganda, as of 18 June


Democratic Republic of the Congo


Since 13 June when the last Disease Outbreak News was published, an additional 220 confirmed cases, including 96 confirmed deaths, have been reported from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The increase is in part due to the scale up of testing and diagnostic capacities, enabling testing of the backlog of previously collected samples. As of 17 June 2026, a total of 896 confirmed cases including 232 deaths (case fatality ratio [CFR] 26%) have been reported from the Democratic Republic of Congo. The reported CFR is likely an underestimation, as many deaths that occurred before the outbreak declaration remain under investigation. So far, 78 patients have recovered. Cases have been reported from 33 health zones (HZ) from Ituri (21/36 HZ), North Kivu (11/35 HZ) and South Kivu provinces (1/34 HZ)[1].


The outbreak remains concentrated in Ituri Province, which accounts for 91.1% (817) of the confirmed cases with a CFR of 22.7% (186/817). The highest number of confirmed cases in Ituri Province are reported from Bunia (247 cases), Rwampara (195 cases), Mongbwalu (189 cases), and Nyankunde (68 cases) health zones. So far, the epicentre of the outbreak remains Ituri, with new confirmed cases reported from an additional four health zones as of 17 June. However, the identification of cases in some of these newly reporting health zones may reflect previously undetected transmission rather than recent introduction of the virus. Epidemiological investigations indicate that transmission had likely been occurring in some of these areas for several weeks before the first cases were confirmed and reported. Of the total confirmed cases, 17 are awaiting distribution by health zone.


As of 17 June, 6367 contacts have been identified and are under follow-up across Ituri (4659), North Kivu (1628), and South Kivu (80) provinces. Of these, 4525 contacts have been followed up, corresponding to follow-up rates of 70.8% in Ituri, 70.5% in North Kivu, and 100% in South Kivu.


The outbreak is unfolding in a complex humanitarian and conflict-affected environment, characterized by highly mobile and often displaced populations, often lacking access to basic services, including food, clean water, shelter, healthcare and protection which poses an increased risk to the populations living in overcrowded internally displaced camps. These dynamics, combined with increasing security-related incidents affecting health facilities, have posed additional operational challenges in affected provinces, such as constrained access for response teams, disrupted surveillance and response activities, and heightened risk of undetected transmission. These conditions underscore the need for response efforts to be led by local leaders and anchored in communities.


Figure 2: Number of confirmed cases (n = 896), in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, by date of reporting as of 17 June 2026


Figure 3: Number of deaths among confirmed cases (n = 232), in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, by date of reporting as of 17 June 2026


NB: Newly reported confirmed cases/deaths may be part of the backlog of samples and therefore not necessarily newly acquired infections.


Uganda


The last confirmed case was reportedly identified on 5 June 2026. As of 18 June 2026, a cumulative of 19 confirmed cases including two deaths in imported cases (reported on 15 May and 5 June), and one probable case who has died, have been reported. Of the confirmed cases, 14 cases are imported and five are secondary transmission among contacts and health workers following cases imported from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The cases have been reported from two districts, Kampala and Wakiso, both part of the Kampala Metropolitan Area. To date, there has been no documented community transmission in Uganda. Exposure risks are associated with healthcare settings and cross-border movements. Following case reclassification, the number of affected healthcare workers was revised from five to four. In total 10 recoveries have been reported to date.


Of the 826 contacts listed as of 18 June, a total of 122 contacts are under active follow up and 694 contacts have completed their 21-day follow-up period.


Figure 4: Number of confirmed cases (n = 19), in Uganda by date of reporting as of 18 June 2026


Bundibugyo virus disease (BVD) is a severe and often fatal form of Ebola disease caused by the Bundibugyo virus, one of the 
Orthoebolavirus
 species. It is a zoonotic disease, with fruit bats suspected to be the natural reservoir. Human infection is thought to occur through close contact with the blood or secretions of infected wildlife, such as bats or non-human primates, and it subsequently spreads from person to person through direct contact with the blood, secretions, organs, or other bodily fluids of infected individuals or contaminated surfaces or items. Transmission is particularly amplified in health-care settings when infection prevention and control (IPC) measures are inadequate, and during unsafe burial practices involving direct contact with the deceased.


The incubation period for BVD ranges from two to 21 days, and individuals are not infectious until symptom onset. Early symptoms such as fever, fatigue, muscle pain, headache, and sore throat, are non-specific, which complicates clinical diagnosis and can delay detection. These symptoms then progress to gastrointestinal symptoms, organ dysfunction, and in some cases haemorrhagic manifestations. CFRs in the past two BVD outbreaks, reported in Uganda and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2007 and 2012 were 30% and 50%, respectively.


Differentiating BVD from other endemic febrile illnesses such as malaria is challenging without laboratory confirmation using PCR or antigen/antibody-based assays. Outbreak control relies on rapid case identification, isolation and care, contact tracing, safe burials, and strong community engagement, as no approved vaccines or specific treatments currently exist for BVD.


Health authorities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda, in collaboration with WHO and partners, are implementing extensive public health measures including implementing the continental response plan, engaging donors and mobilizing additional resources to address critical funding gaps and sustain response operations across affected and at-risk areas.


For further information about public health response actions by the respective Ministry of Health, WHO, and partners, please refer to the latest situation reports published by the WHO Regional Office for Africa 
Ebola Bundibugyo Virus Disease Outbreak Democratic Republic of the Congo | Uganda Weekly External Situation Report 5, Data as of 14 June 2026 | WHO | Regional Office for Africa 


On 6 June 2026, WHO reassessed the risk of the outbreak of BVD to incorporate newly available information and align with the WHO 
Temporary Recommendations
. The risk for countries sharing land borders with countries with documented Bundibugyo virus (BVDV) detection, currently the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda, has been separated out from the risk for other countries in the African Region.


The risk in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains assessed as very high due to ongoing transmission and the continued expansion of the outbreak into new health zones, increasing the potential for further national and regional spread.


The risk in Uganda is still assessed as high due to confirmed cross-border spread through imported cases and ongoing epidemiological links along the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo–western Uganda corridor, historically affected by Ebola outbreaks, including Bundibugyo and Sudan virus disease outbreaks.


The risk for countries with land borders adjoining countries with documented BDBV detection is assessed as high due to sustained population mobility linked to cross-border trade and mining activities, variation in capacities and experience of BVD response, and variable levels of readiness.


The risk for the rest of the Africa region and at the global level is assessed as low.


For further information, please see the 
WHO Rapid Risk Assessment – Ebola disease caused by Bundibugyo virus, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and countries with land borders adjoining countries with documented BDBV detection v3
.


WHO advises against any restriction of travel to, or trade with, the Democratic Republic of the Congo or Uganda based on the currently available information. WHO continues to closely monitor and, where necessary, verify travel and trade measures in relation to this event.


For further information on the considerations for implementing border health and international travel-related temporary recommendations, please see the relevant 
technical note issued on 26 May 2026
.


The 
Temporary Recommendations
 issued to State Parties on 22 May 2026 underscore the importance of coordinated outbreak control, enhanced cross‑border collaboration, and sustained surveillance and preparedness to prevent further regional spread and ensure an effective public health response.


WHO has convened several technical advisory groups, including the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) to assess candidate vaccines and therapeutics for BVD. Key recommendations made are available in the 
news release published on 28 May 2026.


Regular Information products on the outbreak of BVD in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda


Current outbreak: declarations and status


Epidemiological updates and situation reports


Published Disease Outbreak News (current outbreak)


Clinical management, IPC, and occupational safety


Training


Prior Bundibugyo virus disease events, DRC (2012)


Background and reference


Citable reference: World Health Organization (19 June 2026). Disease Outbreak News; Bundibugyo Virus Disease, Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda. Available at: 
https://www/who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak/news/item/2026-DON608


[1] #Data source: Centre des opérations d'urgences de sante publique (COUSP-DRC)