Home
                    


 







                        Middle East
                    








Live


Middle East live: NATO allies to sound out US top diplomat after Trump Iran ire






Issued on: 
22/05/2026 - 04:49
Modified: 
22/05/2026 - 05:49
 


















US Secretary of State Marco Rubio speaks to reporters at Joint Base Andrews in Maryland, March 26, 2026
 
© Brendan Smialowski, Reuters
 















                                NATO's European members will look to sound out US Secretary of State Marco Rubio on troop cuts by Washington Friday, as they seek to smooth over President Donald Trump's ire ahead of a July summit. The meeting of alliance foreign ministers in the Swedish city of Helsingborg comes after the US leader lashed out at Europe over its response to his war on Iran. Follow our liveblog for the latest developments.            




 
 








22/05/2026 - 05:49
Israeli strike kills 2 in south Lebanon


The Israeli military carried out an airstrike in south Lebanon, killing two people it said on Friday were armed and "moving in a suspicious manner" in an area where it is fighting Hezbollah.
Israel and the Iran-backed group have been regularly trading fire in the country's south despite a ceasefire, which was extended by Israeli and Lebanese authorities last week.
"A short while ago, IDF surveillance identified two armed individuals moving in a suspicious manner hundreds of meters from Israeli territory, in southern Lebanon," the Israeli military posted on Telegram.
"Following their identification and continuous monitoring by the IDF, the armed individuals were struck and eliminated in an aerial strike," the post said.






22/05/2026 - 04:55
US Navy official says Taiwan arm sales on 'pause' over Iran war


The acting US Navy secretary said Thursday that arm sales to Taiwan had been put on "pause" to ensure that the American military had sufficient munitions for its Iran operations.
Asked at a congressional hearing about the stalled $14 billion weapons purchase by Taiwan, acting secretary Hung Cao said that "right now we're doing a pause in order to make sure we have the munitions we need for Epic Fury -- which we have plenty."
"But, we're just making sure we have everything, then the foreign military sales will continue when the administration deems necessary."






22/05/2026 - 04:48
NATO allies to sound out US top diplomat after Trump Iran ire


NATO's European members will look to sound out US Secretary of State Marco Rubio on troop cuts by Washington Friday, as they seek to smooth over President Donald Trump's ire ahead of a July summit.
The meeting of alliance foreign ministers in the Swedish city of Helsingborg comes after the US leader lashed out at Europe over its response to his war on Iran -- and threatened he could consider quitting NATO. 
The 77-year-old alliance was rattled this month when Washington abruptly announced it was withdrawing 5,000 troops from Germany after a spat between Trump and Chancellor Friedrich Merz.
While the Trump administration had long warned it would pull out forces from Europe to focus on other threats, a lack of coordination has heightened concern over Washington's reliability in the face of a menacing Russia. 
One of the goals in Helsingborg "is to see whether we've turned the page or not ahead of the Ankara summit," a European diplomat said.








 
A group of Hezbollah-affiliated parliamentarians, state security officials, and allies of the militant group were hit with US 
sanctions
 Thursday, for allegedly seeking to preserve the Iran-backed group's influence over Lebanese state institutions and obstruct disarmament efforts.
 
The 
Board of Peace
's lead envoy for Gaza warned the 
UN Security Council
 on Thursday that the enclave's current division could become permanent, leaving ​more than 2 ‌million people crowded into less than half its territory, unless a ⁠ceasefire takes hold.
 
US Secretary of State 
Marco Rubio
 on Thursday renewed criticism of 
NATO
 for not supporting the US war on 
Iran
, as he headed to alliance 
talks
 in 
Sweden
.
 
 
(FRANCE 24 with Reuters, AP and AFP)


































As it happened





                                    Middle East
                            
































As it happened





                                    Middle East
                            




























1






As it happened





                                    Middle East
                            






















5






As it happened





                                    Middle East
                            




















Keywords for this article