LETTER FROM THE HUMANITARIAN COORDINATOR


In 2025, Ethiopia continued to face a complex humanitarian situation shaped by the combined effects of conflict, climate shocks, displacement and disease outbreaks. Millions of people remained in need of critical assistance, particularly in areas affected by insecurity, recurrent drought and limited access to essential services.


In this context, the Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund (EHF) continued to play a central role in supporting life-saving humanitarian assistance across the country. Through allocating US$44.2 million, the Fund enabled humanitarian partners to reach approximately 3.2 million people, including 1.8 million women and girls and nearly 200,000 people living with disabilities. This impact was made possible through the continued support of 12 donors, whose valuable contributions remain vital to sustaining assistance for the most vulnerable.


Humanitarian operations in Ethiopia in 2025 unfolded against a backdrop of increasing global funding constraints. At a time when humanitarian needs remain high and increasingly complex, and available resources continue to decline, the EHF once again demonstrated its value as a flexible and responsive funding mechanism, capable of directing resources where they are needed most. With a strong network of pre-assessed partners, the Fund enabled rapid allocation and implementation, while maintaining robust standards for risk management, compliance and accountability.


All EHF allocations in 2025 were aligned with priorities set by the Humanitarian Country Team and Advisory Board and informed by regular Priority Humanitarian Response and Critical Funding Gaps analyses led by the Inter-Cluster Coordination Group in close coordination with field-level structures. This collective approach ensured that limited resources were directed to the most urgent, life-saving needs, based on inter-sectoral shared analysis and evidence.


Throughout the year, EHF supported 67 projects implemented by 47 non-governmental organizations, delivering assistance to vulnerable communities across multiple regions. The Fund enabled an integrated response to address food insecurity-, malnutrition-, health-, water-, sanitation-and hygiene-, education-, and protection-related needs, including gender-based violence, as well as the needs of internally displaced people. Importantly, the EHF funding reached people in hard-to-reach and conflict-affected areas, where humanitarian access remains constrained, and assistance would otherwise be limited.


The Fund also remained a key instrument for advancing localization in Ethiopia. In 2025, more than 80 per cent of funding was allocated to Ethiopian non-governmental organizations. Nearly 34 per cent of the funding was channelled to women-led organizations. These efforts contribute to strengthening local leadership and ensuring that humanitarian response is more inclusive, accountable and grounded in the realities of affected communities.


I would like to express my sincere appreciation to all donors to the Ethiopia Humanitarian Fund for their continued support and trust. I also thank the members of the Advisory Board – United Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and donor representatives – for their guidance and engagement. My appreciation also goes to cluster coordinators, strategic review committees and the OCHA team for their dedicated stewardship of this critical funding mechanism.


At a time of persistent needs and constrained resources, continued solidarity and collective action are more essential than ever. Together, we must sustain our efforts to ensure that life-saving assistance reaches those who need it most, wherever they are.


Sincerely,


Ozonnia Ojielo
Humanitarian Coordinator for Ethiopia