Key Figures
Overview
Since 2 March 2026, and despite ceasefire 
announcements, hostilities have escalated, 
including through strikes in South Lebanon, 
Nabatieh, Western Bekaa, and Beirut’s 
southern suburbs, alongside repeated 
evacuation warnings affecting numerous 
towns and villages in the south. Security 
reporting indicates a high volume of military 
activity and a sustained risk of further 
escalation, with civilians, first responders, 
and civilian infrastructure increasingly 
affected. Ongoing insecurity and 
evacuation orders continue to drive non-
linear population movements, as families 
undertake short return attempts before 
relocating again due to security concerns.
Around one million people remain displaced 
from southern Lebanon, the Bekaa, and 
Beirut’s southern suburbs. Families continue 
to move in search of safety and shelter, 
with refugees being among those directly 
affected by attacks, evacuation orders, and 
displacement. Humanitarian needs remain 
acute as continued insecurity constrains 
access and limits prospects for safe and 
sustainable return. Shelter capacity remains 
under pressure, infrastructure damage 
continues to affect access to basic services, 
and livelihoods have been disrupted, 
particularly among vulnerable households 
already facing economic hardship. 
Under the leadership of the Government of 
Lebanon and the Minister of Social Affairs, 
and within the existing Lebanon Response 
Plan (LRP) framework, the Lebanon Flash 
Appeal - initially launched in March – was 
extended for a further three months (June to 
August 2026) to enable partners to rapidly 
deliver effective humanitarian assistance. 
The revised appeal calls for an additional 
US$ 331.5 million to extend the ongoing 
multi-sector assistance to 1.4 million 
vulnerable people in need, totalling needs 
of US$639.9 million.
Pursuant to the revised Flash Appeal, 
UNHCR has correspondingly revised its 
Emergency Appeal and urgently seeks US$ 
94.2 million in flexible funding to ensure 
continuity of assistance amid persistent 
displacement and instability. In line with 
its inclusive response approach, UNHCR 
plans to assist 733,000 individuals (unique) 
– Lebanese and non-Lebanese, including 
refugees – impacted by the hostilities.
 
Middle East Situation
UNHCR revised Emergency Appeal for Lebanon 
March–August 2026
1.4 million  
people in need 
733,000   
unique individuals 
targeted by UNHCR
US$ 94 million  
required
1
Middle East Situation
UNHCR revised Emergency Appeal for Lebanon March–August 2026
Currently, the Lebanon Flash Appeal is only 
60 per cent funded, with approximately 
US$ 185.9 million received against the 
originally US$ 308 million requested, while 
humanitarian needs deepen across shelter, 
food security, protection, health, and WASH 
sectors – as set out in the revised Lebanon 
Flash Appeal. 
With internal displacement of both 
Lebanese and refugees, UNHCR plays a 
critical coordination as well as a response 
role within the sectors its co-leads, namely 
protection, shelter and core relief items, and 
cash assistance, while maintaining overall 
responsibility for the refugee response 
according to its mandate. UNHCR is also a 
member of the Solutions Working Group, 
led by the Resident and Humanitarian 
Coordinator.
To respond to urgent and growing 
humanitarian needs of displaced Lebanese 
and refugees, UNHCR, together with 
partners, is delivering lifesaving protection 
services, shelter support and core relief 
items (CRI), as well as cash assistance to 
cover basic needs like shelter, food and 
medical costs and mitigate protection risks. 
UNHCR was able to immediately launch 
its emergency response on 2 March by 
leveraging existing community-based 
protection and operational infrastructures, to 
support both Lebanese and refugees fleeing 
from or remaining in areas under attack and 
evacuation orders. During the initial three 
months of the emergency response, UNHCR 
has focused on rapid protection monitoring 
and advice, distribution of core-relief items 
to displaced in and outside of collective 
shelters and shelter improvements including 
partitioning, emergency cash assistance, 
protection counselling and referrals of 
individuals with specific vulnerabilities, as 
well as community mobilization to support 
conflict-affected people regain dignity 
and agency. Over this period, UNHCR has 
reached more than 200,000 individuals 
with protection and assistance support.  
As needs and displacement surge across 
both refugee and Lebanese communities, 
UNHCR is, in line with the revised Flash 
Appeal, urgently responding with both 
area-based and individual protection and 
assistance support.
UNHCR Response in Coordination with the Lebanese Government
Protection
• 
 
 
• 
• 
 
 
• 
 
•
Provision of protection services and assistance, such as case management (including child 
protection and Gender-Based violence (GBV), access to Mental Health and Psychosocial Support 
(MHPSS) and specialized services with a particular focus on displaced with specific needs such 
as disability or older age and complementary community-based support.
Reinforcing protection and border monitoring; feeding into protection trend analysis and 
protection mainstreaming
Reinforcement of community structures and outreach through Community Development 
Centres (CDCs) and mobile teams, receiving an increasing number of displaced refugee and 
Lebanese families, where information, counselling and psychosocial support is provided, and 
referrals to needed services are made.
Capacity support for the Ministry of Social Affairs, including social workers in collective 
shelters, to support a sustainable and nationally-led response.
Emergency protection cash, through a one-time grant of USD 150, to help address pressing 
protection concerns of the most vulnerable, directly impacted and displaced refugees.
2
Middle East Situation
UNHCR revised Emergency Appeal for Lebanon March–August 2026
Shelter (Including Core Relief Items)
• 
 
•
• 
• 
•
•
Maintenance and minor repair of public buildings serving as collective shelters, including 
partitioning, accessibility (for displaced with low mobility), as well as window, door and bathroom 
improvements to enhance dignity of living conditions.
Rehabilitation/repair of individual substandard shelters to improve living conditions for 
vulnerable refugees and host community members residing in substandard shelters in return for 
tenure security arrangements.
Distribution of shelter kits and other improvements of shelters for displaced staying outside of 
collective shelters
Provision of cash for rent for families renting adequate shelters to enable displaced 
households to move out of collective shelters and to offset eviction risks and provide tenure 
security. 
Provision of cash for shelter for families hosted in adequate shelters, based on socio-economic 
and protection vulnerability.
Distribution of core-relief items for newly displaced families (high-thermal blankets, sleeping 
mats, solar lamps, mattresses, and kitchen sets.
Multi-Purpose Cash Assistance
• 
 
Emergency multi-purpose cash assistance (EMPCA) for displaced refugees in complementarity 
with the Government’s Shock Responsive Safety Net (SRSN). This assistance is aligned with the 
SRSN’s methodology and comprise one off payments of up to USD 145 to households.
CONTACT: 
Juliette Stevenson I Senior External Relations Officer I stevenso@unhcr.org I Beirut, Lebanon
Financial Requirements by Sector for the Revised Flash Appeal (March–August 2026)
The Importance of Flexible Funding
In this dynamic operational environment, flexible 
funding is vital for UNHCR to remain agile and 
ensure the response is efficient and adaptive 
in order to provide protection and assistance 
to the people who need it most. The financial 
requirements presented here are based on the 
current context and may be adjusted as the 
situation evolves. 
To all donors, especially those who provide 
funding that is flexible and not earmarked for a 
particular use, UNHCR extends its most sincere 
thanks to Australia, Austria, Czech Republic, 
European Union, Finland, France, Germany, 
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, 
Republic of Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, CERF 
and private donors.  
Sector Financial Requirements (US$ Million)
Protection  
(including response to violence against women and children) 18,673,713
Multi-Purpose Cash Assistance 17,196,013
Shelter (including core relief items) 58,366,000
TOTAL 94,235,726