The discovery of previously undeclared chemical weapons in Syria — including the types infamously used in the town of Ghouta in 2013 — marks a “momentous” step forward for the global community, the Security Council heard today, as the UN’s senior disarmament official updated members on recent developments.
“This is a critical opportunity for the [global] disarmament and non-proliferation regime,” said Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs.
Briefing the 15-member Council on the latest international efforts to implement 
resolution 2118 (2013)
 — which called for the complete elimination of Syria’s chemical weapons programme — she recalled that the Organisation on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) had, since 2014, been unable to confirm that the country’s declaration on its chemical weapons was “accurate and complete”.  The declaration was widely considered dubious as it was submitted by the Government of the former President of Syria, Bashar al-Assad, who was 
ousted
 in 2024.
She said that the new Government led by President Ahmed al-Sharaa has been working closely working with OPCW inspectors to clarify outstanding chemical weapons concerns.
With that support and amid improved regional security conditions, she said an OPCW team deployed to Syria in May discovered a “significant amount” of undeclared chemical weapons, related materials and documentation — including evidence of previously undeclared chemical munitions.  Rockets were also found, of the same type as those that were used in the chemical weapons attack in the Syrian city of Ghouta in August 2013.
“These findings are a momentous discovery — not just for Syria, but for international security and the global disarmament regime,” she said.  Their discovery was made possible by OPCW’s unflagging efforts, the new Syrian Government’s compliance with international law and the Council’s continued advocacy.
“This cooperation will remain critical going forward, as the newly discovered elements now need to be declared and destroyed, under the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s verification,” she said, adding that further deployments to additional sites will also be needed.
Speakers Welcome Progress, But Urge Careful Vetting
Council members took the floor following the briefing, with many hailing the recent progress made jointly by the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the new Syrian authorities.
“This is an important moment,” said the United Kingdom’s delegate.  “Not only has this [new finding] reduced the residual chemical weapons threat to the Syrian people, it also provides further proof of Assad’s attempt to actively deceive the international community.”  Despite the “opaque and challenging context” in which OPCW is operating, Syria along with international partners is achieving tangible results.
The representative of the United States
 
agreed. “OPCW and Syria have demonstrated adaptability, flexibility and a shared commitment and determination to uphold the [Chemical Weapons] Convention and close this chapter of Syria’s history,” she said.  Joining other speakers in praising OPCW’s work and welcoming its recent findings, she urged Syria’s new Government to continue its cooperation with the agency and fully comply with its obligations under the Convention.
The representatives of Bahrain, Greece, Pakistan and Panama echoed support for OPCW’s work and praised Syria’s cooperative spirit, with the latter emphasizing the need for de-escalation across the Middle East to facilitate such important work.
That point was also highlighted by Colombia’s representative, Council President for May, who spoke in her national capacity.  The latest OPCW report demonstrates the need to adequately secure suspected chemical weapons sites and prevent the loss or alteration of evidence, she stressed, expressing concern about the continued impact of conflict across the region.
“In a time of growing tensions and in a region seized with conflict, the new Syrian authorities are pursuing an international effort towards stability, transparency and compliance with international law,” said Latvia’s representative.  “The elimination of one of the most dreadful types of weaponry is not just a clear proof of [Syria’s] good faith, but also a powerful signal to States suffering from division and conflict that a new day and a better future are possible.”
Despite Progress, Task Ahead ‘Complex’
The representative of Denmark, meanwhile, acknowledged that “the task ahead remains complex”.  Pointing to the complicated security environment and the amount of potentially relevant locations across Syria, she underscored the need to “continuously prioritize this file” in the Council’s work.
The representative of France agreed, commending OPCW for its “independence, rigour, professionalism and commitment”, while adding that its recent discovery is “only just beginning to reveal the extent of the programme hidden from the international community”.
In contrast, the representative of China declared:  “The Syrian chemical weapons issue has been under discussion for more than 10 years and should be swiftly brought to a close to help Syria redirect resources towards national reconstruction.” He nevertheless urged the new Government to take counter-terrorism seriously, including as it addresses matters related to chemical weapons.
Somalia’s delegate, also speaking for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Liberia, said OPCW’s fresh deployments to Syria demonstrate the agency’s resilient framework for verification, “despite a challenging security environment”.  While praising recent developments, he nevertheless warned that the potential presence of previously undeclared chemical weapons materials is a serious matter requiring transparency and further investigation.
The Russian Federation’s delegate said it is no surprise that OPCW is quickly trying to “assign blame” for the substances it just found, without adequate investigation.  “Today, the proponents of OPCW’s work rejoice when they loudly declare the discovery of what they have been seeking for so long,” he said, urging them to “cool their ardour”.  In fact, OPCW long ago compromised itself, and any recent findings must be carefully examined and verified in a depoliticized manner, he stressed.
32 Visits, 60,000 Pages of Documents
The representative of Syria, who also addressed the Council, underscored the leading role played by national experts in the laudable recent discovery of chemical weapons linked to the former regime — similar to those used in its attacks against civilians.  Describing the recent discovery as a “decisive turning point” and a “major leap forward in delivering accountability”, he said Syria facilitated 32 visits by the OPCW Technical Secretariat to suspected chemical-weapons sites and provided it with more than 60,000 pages of documents.
While that work is critical and praiseworthy, he nevertheless said the recent progress is bittersweet as it brings back terrible memories of the previous Government.  “Syria suffered from chemical weapons for more than 12 years,” he said, adding:  “Today, it is committed to rid itself of its legacy.”
Türkiye’s delegate said OPCW’s recent discoveries serve as a “stark reminder of the scale of repression and suffering inflicted on the Syrian people by the former regime”.  Emphasizing that work on this issue is highly technical and operationally complex, he said sustainable progress can only be achieved through gradual, practical and well-coordinated cooperation with Syria.  In addition, he emphasized that “the time is ripe” to reinstate Syria’s rights and privileges under the Chemical Weapons Convention, which were 
suspended in 2021
.