Good morning. Hostilities have resumed between the US and Iran. Tehran accused the US of violating the agreement intended to end the war, after 
the US military launched strikes around the strait of Hormuz
 and revoked a temporary sanctions waiver for Iranian oil exports. The attacks were the latest in a string of ceasefire violations by the two sides despite a truce that came into effect in April, and have led to an immediate 3% rise in oil prices.
Speaking at the Nato summit in Ankara, 
Donald Trump said
 the memorandum of understanding with Iran was over and called the country’s leaders “vicious, violent people” who he would not deal with because they were, in the US president’s words, “scum”. He nevertheless appeared to indicate that talks would continue. Nato’s ⁠secretary general, Mark Rutte, backed the US attacks, saying: “When you ​have ‌a ‌ceasefire and Iran ‌is basically violating the ceasefire, I think it is ‌totally crucial that the ​US forcefully react.”
Bernie Sanders calls on Graham Platner to withdraw from Senate race
Bernie Sanders with Graham Platner in May.
 Photograph: Robert F Bukaty/AP
The progressive senator Bernie Sanders 
called on Graham Platner to withdraw
 from the US Senate race in Maine, citing “very serious allegations” of sexual assault, hours before the nominee faced another claim of sexual misconduct.
Platner has denied the latest allegations, reported by Politico and later by the Washington Post, but the initial report prompted a wave of prominent 
Democrats
 to urge him to stand aside as the party’s nominee in the consequential Senate contest. Platner has said he is “taking the time to reflect on the best path forward”.




How could Democrats replace Platner?
 It is possible for Democrats to select a new Senate nominee in Maine, but the clock is ticking. To have a new candidate on the ballot for November’s midterm elections, Platner needs to end his campaign by 5pm ET on 13 July, according to state law. That would give the Democrats a two-week window – until 5pm ET on 27 July – to pick a replacement.


US appeals court strikes down key part of Florida law restricting campus race and gender discussions
The governor of Florida, Ron DeSantis.
 Photograph: Jefferee Woo/Tampa Bay Times/Zuma Press Wire/Shutterstock
A federal appeals panel has 
struck down a significant chunk
 of Ron DeSantis’s so-called Stop Woke Act, delivering another rebuff to the Republican Florida governor’s efforts to stifle free speech in higher education.
In a scathing order, judges of the 11th circuit court of appeal ruled by a 2-1 majority that the higher education component of the law – which prevented college and university professors teaching or sharing thoughts on concepts of race and gender – breached the free expression rights guaranteed under the US constitution’s first amendment.




What did the judges conclude?
 Britt Grant, a Donald Trump-appointed judge who wrote the majority opinion, said the proposed law was “a breathtaking assertion of power to ban unpopular ideas from public discourse in the very places the state’s own statutes recognize as centers of inquiry. The ideas Florida targets may well be noxious. Or maybe not. Either way, in this context the first amendment trusts students to figure it out for themselves.”


In other news …
Tyler Robinson, accused in the fatal shooting of Charlie Kirk, listens to the prosecution in Utah.
 Photograph: Getty Images




Prosecutors say video shows the suspect in Charlie Kirk killing 
climbing on to a roof
. 
The Utah county attorney’s office says the evidence against Tyler James Robinson is sufficient for case to move to trial.




The International Olympic Committee has 
lifted its suspension on Russia
, paving the way for Russian teams to appear at the Los Angeles 2028 Games.




US authorities have announced charges against the leader of an Indian criminal group
 in connection with 
the political assassination of a prominent Sikh activist
 in Canada.




Nigel Farage, the Trump-aligned British right
wing politician, 
has resigned as an MP
 in an attempt to force his re-election, a move opponents have dismissed as a publicity stunt and seem likely to boycott.




More than 400 people were arrested
 at a Fourth of July ‘TikTok takeover’
 of a beach in California.


Stat of the day: DC records world’s worst air quality for a city after 850,000 Fourth of July fireworks
Fireworks light up the Washington  DC sky.
 Photograph: Hunter Cone/Zuma Press Wire/Shutterstock
Washington DC residents breathed in “unhealthy” air for hours after a 40-minute Independence Day fireworks show over the National Mall on Saturday night. The country’s capital briefly recording 
the worst air quality of any major city in the world
. The display came as the Trump administration rolls back an unprecedented number of pollution controls.
Well Actually: How to start volunteering
 Illustration: Carmen Casado/The Guardian
There are mental and physical benefits to volunteering, including increased quality of life, pride, empowerment, motivation, social support and sense of community. But where to start? 
Madeleine Aggeler asked a set of experts
.
Don’t miss this: The US had the biggest opportunity in the history of American soccer and they wasted it
US soccer fans at the National Mall in Washington DC.
 Photograph: Ali Khaligh/Zuma Press Wire/Shutterstock
Alexander Abnos writes
 that the humbling exit of the USMNT from the Fifa men’s World Cup the country has been co-hosting was a missed generational chance to put the sport in the spotlight. Jeff Rueter meanwhile, who was at Seattle Stadium to see the US capitulate 4-1 to Belgium, laments that 
injury robbed the star player
 Christian Pulisic of showing his true potential during the tournament, while the future of coach Mauricio Pochettino 
appears uncertain
.
… or this: Can Netflix reboot Little House on 
the Prairie for a new generation?
A still from the new Little House on the Prairie.
 Photograph: Eric Zachanowich/Netflix
The original 1930s books traded on a powerful, intoxicating myth of American resilience at a time when so many were struggling and losing faith in those in power, the 1970s TV series was often cited as Ronald Reagan’s favourite show, and Netflix is betting big on its new adaptation. 
Matthew Allan examines
 how a strange confluence of cultural trends and political circumstances could help it soar.
Climate check: Water crisis deepens in US west
Lake Powell in April.
 Photograph: RJ Sangosti/MediaNews Group/The Denver Post/Getty Images
Lake Powell, the US’s second-largest reservoir, 
threatens to plunge to unprecedentedly low levels this year
 after a historically bleak snowpack failed to raise its water level. That is imperilling hydroelectric power and throwing more uncertainty into an already contentious negotiation over how to divvy up an increasingly unreliable water supply used by 40 million people across seven states, dozens of tribal nations and two countries.
Last Thing: Dolly Parton musical set for Broadway this winter
Dolly Parton at Glastonbury festival in 2014.
 Photograph: Brian Rasic/Getty Images
Billed as “a remarkable journey through the life of this trailblazing woman”, the incomparable Dolly Parton will celebrate turning 81 with 
the opening of a musical about her life on Broadway
 later this year. Featuring signature hits such as I Will Always Love You, Jolene, Coat of Many Colors and 9 to 5, Parton described the show coming to New York as “a dream come true”.
Sign up
Sign up for the US morning briefing
First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, 
subscribe now
.
Get in touch
If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email 
newsletters@theguardian.com