TUESDAY
9 JUNE 2026
1800 HRS UTC +7
DATA SOURCES
ASEAN Disaster Monitoring & Response System (DMRS); Pacific Disaster Center (PDC Global);
Indonesia: BNPB, BMKG
Philippines: NDRRMC, PHIVOLCS;
Verified news media agencies.
© 2026 AHA Centre.
All rights reserved.
You are receiving this email because you are 
registered in our distribution list.
Our mailing address is:
AHA Centre,
GRAHA BNPB 13th Floor, 
Jl. Raya Pramuka Kav. 38,
Jakarta 13120 Indonesia
DISCLAIMER
The  AHA Centre was established in November 2011 by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Member States to facil itate cooperation and coordination among the Member States, 
relevant agencies of the United Nations, and international organisations in disaster management and humanitarian assistance. 
The use of boundaries, geographic names, related information and potential considerations for response are for reference, not warranted to be error free or implying official endorsement from ASEAN 
Member States.
Disclosure: The names, boundaries, colours, designations, and other information shown on the associated maps above do not imply any 
opinion or judgement by the AHA Centre or PDC regarding the legal status of any territory, nor do they constitute endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries. The reported impacts for Indonesia are based on BNPB reports, issued on 9 June at 0700H (UTC+7), and 
for the Philippines are based on the NDRRMC Situation Report No. 1, issued on 9 June 2026 at 0700H (UTC+7) and OCD Press Briefing
(data as of 0800H UTC+7). Data collection and validation are still ongoing.
KEY FIGURES
● OVERVIEW: According to PHIVOLCS the magnitude 7.8 earthquake that occurred in Sarangani, Philippines was tectonic in
origin and is attributed to subduction along the Cotabato Trench, a major earthquake-generating structure located off the
coast. PHIVOLCS recorded a highest instrumental intensity of VII (PEIS), experienced in General Santos City and intensity
VI in Palimbang, Senator Ninoy Aquino, Sultan Kudarat. In Indonesia, the earthquake was also felt and impacted Sangihe,
Talaud, and Minahasa in North Sulawesi as reported by BMKG and BNPB.
● TSUNAMI: PHIVOLCS reported tsunami observations in six areas with the highest waves recorded at 1.48m in Kiamba,
Sarangani. PHIVOLCS lifted the tsunami warning at 1419H UTC+7. BMKG also reported tsunami waves with height at most
0.75m in North Sulawesi. BMKG lifted the tsunami warning at 1015H UTC+7.
● IMPACTS & DAMAGES:
● HAZARDS & ANTICIPATED RISKS
o Aftershocks – As of 0600H UTC+7 today, around 1,055 aftershocks were recorded, with highest at M6.7 (PHIVOLCS).
o Landslides – Mountainous and highly sloped areas are particularly vulnerable to earthquake-induced landslides, rock
falls, and tension cracks, which could be further aggravated by heavy rainfall or subsequent aftershocks.
o Liquefaction – In low-lying, water-saturated, and sandy areas, the intense shaking can cause liquefaction, manifesting
as ground fissures, sand boils, and subsidence. This liquefaction-induced subsidence combined with changes in sea
level can also make coastal areas and active river channels highly susceptible to seawater inundation.
● RESPONSE EFFORTS:
PHILIPPINES
o The Philippine President convened national and local officials and deployed Cabinet members to affected areas to
oversee a whole-of-government response, including ongoing emergency operations, damage assessments, and relief
efforts for communities impacted by the magnitude 7.8 earthquake.
o DSWD is leading relief efforts, prioritising food aid, essential supplies, and the setup of safe evacuation centres.
o Response efforts, led by the local governments, are prioritising search, rescue, retrieval, and debris clearing operations,
while addressing urgent shelter needs such as housing repair kits, construction materials, and temporary shelters.
o The Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines (CAAP) has restricted operations at General Santos International Airport
to government, military, and humanitarian flights only.
o The NDRRMOC remains on full RED alert together with their regional offices and local emergency operations centres.
INDONESIA
o BNPB, BMKG , and BPBD issued evacuation advisories and carried out comprehensive evacuations in districts/cities
where tsunami impacts were detected.
o BNPB coordinated with affected district/city BPBDs to collect data on casualties, affected populations, and
infrastructure damage.
o BNPB identified several challenges, including the remoteness of affected areas, with travel between locations requiring
approximately 4–5 hours, and disruptions to communication networks caused by power outages.
The AHA Centre sent a letter of sympathy and offer of assistance to NDRRMC–OCD on 8 June 2026. In its response,
NDRRMC expressed appreciation to ASEAN and ASEAN Member States and informed that a comprehensive assessment
of the impacts and response requirements is ongoing. Should additional assistance be required, the Government of the
Philippines will coordinate with the AHA Centre and formally communicate its needs. The AHA Centre EOC Alert Level
remains on ORANGE and continues to coordinate closely with the affected ASEAN Member States, remaining on standby
should ASEAN assistance be requested.
Philippines
488
injured persons 
(ongoing 
validation)
33.5K
displaced persons
of which 32K individuals 
served inside 54 ECs
37
deaths 
(ongoing 
validation)
4
missing persons 
(ongoing 
validation)
Indonesia
1.2K
displaced persons
95
houses damaged
2
schools damaged
1
hospital damaged
Dadiangas University in General Santos City
(source: Reppler)
PHILIPPINES
o 37 deaths (ongoing validation)
o 4 missing persons (ongoing validation)
o 488 injured persons (ongoing validation)
o 32.9K families (145.7K individuals) affected
o 8.7K families (32K individuals) displaced and accommodated in 54 
evacuation centres (ECs) and 1,804 persons served outside ECs
o 2.5K houses damaged (460 totally damaged)
o 10 road sections and 2 bridges affected
o 12 cities/municipalities experienced power interruptions, of which 6 
have been restored.
Damages buildings in General Santos City
(source: Reuters)
Damages in General Santos Airport
(source: Philippine Star)
Buildings damaged in North Sulawesi
(source: BNPB)
INDONESIA
o 1,160 persons displaced
o 95 houses damaged
o 2 churches damaged
o 2 schools damaged
o 1 hospital damaged
o 2 other buildings damaged
Map Sources: HazardHunterPH | BNPB reports, issued on 9 June at 0700H (UTC+7 ) | 
NDRRMC Situation Report No. 1, issued on 9 June 2026 at 0700H (UTC+7 ) |
M7.8 EARTHQUAKE IN SARANGANI 
INDONESIA, PHILIPPINES
FLASH UPDATE #2