Good morning.
In a casual aside during a cabinet meeting on Wednesday, Donald Trump 
threatened to “blow up” Oman
, a US ally, if it failed to “behave” over the reopening the strait of Hormuz.
There have been reports of talks between Iran and Oman about jointly charging a toll for ships passing through the crucial waterway, which was open before 
US-Israel war on Iran
 but has been all but closed since.
“The strait is going to be open to everybody,” Trump said. “Nobody’s going to control it. We’re going to watch over it. We’ll watch over it. But nobody’s going to control it … Oman will behave just like everybody else. Or else we’ll have to blow them up. They understand that.”
Oman has decades-long military and economic ties with the US. It has also mediated in the war, and has been attacked by Tehran.




What is the latest on a deal to end the war?
 Negotiations are continuing but the US earlier this week struck Iranian targets, reportedly killing four members of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, which prompted an apparent Iranian retaliatory attack on an American airbase in Kuwait.




What is happening inside Iran? 
Internet restrictions were partially lifted this week, revealing 
increasing anger from Iranians
 over rapid food price inflation.


Israeli military tells residents in southern Lebanon to leave
Rescuers remove a body from the rubble of a home hit by an Israeli strike near the town of Burj al-Shamali.
 Photograph: Kawnat Haju/AFP/Getty Images
Israel’s military has 
told residents across a swathe of southern Lebanon to leave
 and head north, as the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said his forces were escalating their offensive against Hezbollah.
The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) said in a post on social media that all areas south of the Zahrani River, which runs about 25 miles (40km) north of the de facto Israel-Lebanon border, were considered combat zones.
The warning came a day after Israel launched more than 120 airstrikes against Lebanon in one of the heaviest days of bombing in weeks. As of this morning, at least a dozen people 
have been killed
 in Israeli attacks on southern Lebanon, local media reported.




What is the humanitarian toll of the war?
 More than 1 million people in Lebanon have been displaced in the latest round of hostilities between Hezbollah and Israel, which began in March. At least 3,213 people have been killed in Israeli strikes since the start of the war, according to the Lebanese health ministry. The office of Israel’s prime minister reported that 23 Israeli soldiers and a defence contractor had been killed in or near southern Lebanon, and two civilians had been killed in northern Israel.




What is life like inside Israel’s “yellow line”?
 The Guardian’s William Christou, in Kfarchouba, Lebanon, 
spoke to the villagers living in fear
 of nightly raids and daytime bombings from the Israeli military occupying their land.


World almost certain to endure record hot year by 2030, UN warns
Southern Vietnam in 2024, the hottest year ever recorded globally.
 Photograph: Nhac Nguyen/AFP/Getty Images
A record-breaking hot year is almost certain by 2030 as the climate crisis intensifies, the UN’s World Meteorological Organization 
has predicted
.
With an El Niño event expected later this year, the global temperature record could fall as soon as 2027.
Carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuels are continuing to rise, trapping more heat and creating more extreme weather. Global heating is estimated to 
take one life every minute
, with the toll likely to rise unless emissions fall rapidly.
In other news …
Joe Biden in January 2025.
 Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images
Stat of the day: WHO chief calls for DRC ceasefire to tackle Ebola outbreak as suspected deaths reach 246
Congolese soldiers stand inside the remains of an Ebola isolation tent burned down by ‘unidentified individuals’ in Mongbwalu, DRC.
 Photograph: Michel Lunanga/Getty Images
The head of the World Health Organization, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, 
called for an immediate ceasefire
 in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo on Wednesday to help tackle the Ebola outbreak. There have been 1,077 suspected cases and 246 suspected Ebola deaths during the current outbreak, 
WHO data shows
. It comes as
 
the Trump administration said it was 
building a quarantine and treatment center
 in Kenya for Americans affected, instead of bringing them home.
The Filter recommends: Tips on how to cat-proof your home
Can you save your couch from landfill?
 Photograph: Tetiana Vitsenko/Alamy
For the Filter US, 
Marissa Miller checked out
 10 items to pet-proof a home, such as a water fountain, a calming diffuser and a built-in scratching post – which has “completely saved my couch from ending up in a landfill”, she says.
Don’t miss this: Saint Levant – the pop star from Gaza caught between passionate fandom and bitter disapproval
Palestinian singer and musician Saint Levant in Paris, 2025.
 Photograph: Sadaka Edmond/Sipa/Shutterstock
His detractors say he should not be making pop music in times of war and destruction. His millions of fans say he has given them permission to celebrate their culture and their cause. 
Nesrine Malik writes about Saint Levant
, the 25-year-old musician from Gaza.
Climate check: How ‘balcony solar’ could help fight rising US utility costs
A ‘balcony power plant’, as it is known in Germany.
 Photograph: Climate Central
Since 2020, US residential energy prices have surged by about 30%, according to the US Energy Information Administration. But while the US has been slow to adopt personal solar technology, in Germany it has become a cultural phenomenon – known as 
Balkonkraftwerk
, or “balcony power plant”. 
Ben Tracy reports
 on the potential US impact of “balcony solar” on energy bills.
Last Thing: What are the best World Cup uniforms for 2026?
The Japan away kit with, left, William Saliba in the France home kit and Ryan Christie in Scotland away.
 Composite: Guardian Design/Nike/Adidas
With the World Cup only two weeks away, Lauren Cochrane, a senior Guardian fashion writer, 
looked at the teams’ top jerseys
 – from riffs on much-loved favourites, to new entries with the potential to become classics.
Sign up
Sign up for the US morning briefing
First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, 
subscribe now
.
Get in touch
If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email 
newsletters@theguardian.com