Iran's parliamentary speaker Mohammad Bagher Ghalibaf accused the US of breaching their Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on this issue, and others, including the attacks in southern Iran and "violating Iranian adjustments in the Strait".
"The era of bullying and extortion is over. It leads nowhere. We don't fold," he said.
Nato chief Mark Rutte described the American strikes as "absolutely necessary", saying that Iran was "basically violating the ceasefire". 
It is not the first time strikes occurred after the 
MoU was signed on 17 June
. 
The US launched a series of 
strikes on Iran on 26 June
 after an Iranian projectile hit a cargo ship in the Strait of Hormuz. Further US strikes 
took place on 27 June
, following an attack on a tanker. But later that month both sides had agreed to "stand down". 
Part of the MoU's 14 points is for an "immediate and permanent termination of military operations on all fronts". 
Iran agreed to use its "best efforts for the safe passage of commercial vessels with no charge for 60 days".
Both sides had continued negotiations on the terms of a permanent end to the war, but talks were paused during funeral ceremonies for the late Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who was killed on the first day of US-Israel strikes on Iran.
Ceremonies are taking place in Iraq on Wednesday, with the final rites and burial set for Mashhad in north-east Iran on Thursday.
It is not clear when talks will resume after this latest round of strikes, as Trump responded to a question about further negotiations with the comment: "I don't care". 
"Frankly, I don't want to waste my time with them. Now, I'll let our wonderful negotiators keep talking if they want, but I don't see it," Trump said.
"As far as I'm concerned, it's just a waste of time dealing with them. They're liars."
Trump also referenced his special envoy Steve Witkoff and son-in-law Jared Kushner, calling them "good people" who could negotiate if they wanted to. The pair previously played a role in peace talks.
"I'll speak to our negotiators, if they want to negotiate they're good people - Steve Witkoff, Jared Kushner - but they have to come back to me, as far as I'm concerned it's just a waste of time."