Key Findings


• The Horn of Africa and the Greater Middle East conflict clusters risk merging. If this

were to occur, it would be catastrophic for the global economy, causing more

countries to be drawn into the conflict.


• The Horn of Africa and the Greater Middle East are currently strongly

interconnected. The connections run through Gulf sponsorship, Red Sea

geography, gold flows from Sudan to the United Arab Emirates (UAE), and the wars

in Yemen and Sudan.


• A group of states function as bridging actors across both systems: UAE, Saudi

Arabia, Egypt, Türkiye, and Israel. Each is structurally embedded in both regions at

once, concerned with issues of Nile security, regional influence, Red Sea access,

and the containment of Iran.


• Almost every country in an active conflict today belongs to one of eight regional

clusters. Each cluster is held together by shared external sponsors, refugee flows,

illicit economies, ethnic networks, or traLicking routes.


• The eight systems are the Horn of Africa, the Sahel and Lake Chad basin, the

Greater Middle East, the Great Lakes and Central Africa, Eastern Europe,

Afghanistan and Pakistan, Mainland Southeast Asia, and the Andean corridor.


• Geopolitical fragmentation has risen across financial, mobility, political, and trade

dimensions over the past 15 years, reversing decades of integration. Vetoes have

risen, and UN Security Council resolutions have declined, leaving the principal

body for coordinating international responses increasingly gridlocked.


• The 2025–26 Iran war is the largest interlocking event in years. It transmits local

conflict dynamics to the global economy by disrupting Red Sea shipping and

pushing food and fuel prices higher in import-dependent states.


• The Horn and the Greater Middle East are becoming increasingly interlocked, but

they remain two separate conflict systems. If the Horn sponsors became aligned,

then the two systems could merge into one conflict system, further stressing the

international economic system.


• The conflict actor alliance most likely to initiate a merging of the two conflict

systems is the emerging UAE–Israel–Ethiopia axis, set against a Saudi–Egypt–

Türkiye reaction.


• Another convergence factor is the conversion of the Red Sea from a shared corridor

into a single contested space, in which the Houthi threat, Gulf port competition,

and the militarisation of Bab al-Mandab and the Suez approach are all managed as

one military theatre.