Donald Trump says $1.7bn compensation fund would be administered by 'committee of very talented people'
Donald Trump said he “wasn’t involved in” the creation of a 
so-called anti-weaponization fund
, but said it had been “well received”.
In response to a follow-up question asking how the fund would be administered and whether the president himself and his family would seek compensation through the fund, Trump said “it’ll all be dependent on a committee” of “very talented people”.
Share
Updated at 
18.16 EDT
Key events
Show key events only
Please turn on JavaScript to use this feature
Closing summary
Our live coverage is ending now. In the meantime, you can find all of our live US politics coverage 
here
.
Here is a summary of the key developments from today:




Police are investigating a deadly shooting at the Islamic Center of San Diego as a hate crime, after three people were killed and two dead suspects were identified near the scene.
 Democratic leaders from across the country issued statements in the wake of the shooting calling out Islamophobia and advocating for stricter gun laws.




At a healthcare affordability event, 
Donald Trump
 announced that his website TrumpRx.gov will now include a catalog of generic drugs. 
Trump touted the move as “increasing the number of drugs available on TrumpRx by nearly seven times, adding over 600 affordable generics to the website”. After TrumpRx.gov launched in February, listing only 43 medications, healthcare experts 
pointed to other websites
 that better aggregated affordable drug deals.




Trump has said he would “hold off” an attack on Iran scheduled for Tuesday at the request of Gulf leaders. 
In response to a reporter’s question Monday, Trump said he postponed striking Iran for two to three days at the request of Saudi Arabia, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates “because they think that they are getting very close to making a deal”.




Trump moved to dismiss a $10bn lawsuit against the Interal Revenue Service and his administration 
created a $1.776bn “anti-weaponization” fund
 to compensate his allies for supposed persecution by the government.
 Democrats harshly criticized the settlement, 
saying
 it amounts to the creation of a “slush fund” for the president’s allies. 
Ninety-three congressional Democrats
 – including House minority leader Hakeem Jeffries – filed an amicus brief with the court on Monday saying that such a claim “raises the specter of corruption unparalleled in American history”. Later in the day, Trump said he “wasn’t involved in” the creation the fund and said it would be run by a committee of “very talented people”.




An effort to reshape South Carolina’s congressional districts got its first full airing Monday in the state House. 
Lawmakers launched a lengthy discussion over the consequences of acceding to Trump’s calls for a US House map that could yield a clean sweep for Republicans.




Trump also said he is requesting the attorney general and Justice Department investigate mail-in voting in Maryland. 
In a post on Truth Social, Trump alleged that Maryland had “sent out 500,000 Illegal Mail In Ballots” and blamed “the Corrupt Governor of the State, Wes Moore”, a Democrat, who “allowed this to happen in order to make sure that Democrats win”.




Nancy Pelosi
 has endorsed San Francisco supervisor 
Connie Chan
 in the race to fill the seat Pelosi will vacate at the end of her term.




The 
Trump administration
 has proposed allowing up to 17,500 
white South Africans
 to enter the United States as refugees, beginning in the new fiscal year, CNN reports, citing an emergency determination letter sent to Congress that it obtained.


Many of the contenders in California’s gubernatorial election have issued statements in the wake of the deadly shooting at a San Diego mosque.
“California is strongest when we reject fear, division, and extremism in all its forms,” said former state attorney general 
Xavier Becerra
.
“To our Muslim communities in San Jose and across California: you belong here, and we will protect your right to worship freely and safely,” said San Jose mayor 
Matt Mahan
.
“All Californians, no matter what you look like or what faith you belong to, deserve to go to school, houses of worship [sic], and work without fearing for their lives,” said former California congresswoman 
Katie Porter
. “Our next Governor must be prepared to protect our communities and fight back against such horrific acts of gun violence and Islamophobia.”
“We must all condemn hatred and violence targeting the Muslim community. There is no place for Islamophobia in our state,” said businessman 
Tom Steyer
.
Share
Updated at 
21.15 EDT
Democratic leaders from across the country are continuing to issue statements grieving the deadly mosque shooting in San Diego.
“I am horrified by the deadly attack at the Islamic Center of San Diego, an apparent act of anti-Muslim violence,” 
New York City
 mayor 
Zohran Mamdani
 said in a social media post. “Islamophobia endangers Muslim communities across this country. We must confront it directly and stand together against the politics of fear and division. My thoughts are with the victims, their loved ones, and the entire community grieving this devastating attack.”
“Devastated by the horrific attack at the Islamic Center of San Diego,” 
Minnesota
 congresswoman 
Ilhan Omar
 said in a statement on social media. “There is no place for anti-Muslim hate in America. We must confront this violence and protect the right to worship safely.”
“This tragedy at the Islamic Center of San Diego was motivated by hate—something we see far too often now. We must call out Islamophobia wherever we see it and we NEED gun violence laws, now,” said 
Arizona
 congresswoman 
Yassamin Ansari
. “We cannot allow hate to become the norm in our communities and we cannot permit this kind of violence to keep happening.”
The 
Trump administration
 has proposed allowing up to 17,500 white South Africans to enter the United States as refugees, beginning in the new fiscal year, CNN reports, citing an emergency determination letter sent to Congress that it obtained.
The president is required to consult with Congress on a refugee admissions ceiling each year. In 2024, the United States set its refugee admissions ceiling at 125,000. After Trump returned to office, his administration slashed that number to 7,500. This year, the administration is proposing raising the level to 17,500 specifically for white South Africans – who Trump says are facing “a genocide”.
The first white South Africans granted refugee status by Trump arrived in the United States about one year ago. My colleagues 
Rachel Savage
 
and
 
David Smith
 reported then on the president’s decision to extend protections to them then:


On the same day the group arrived in the US, Trump’s government also ended legal protections that had temporarily protected Afghans from deportation, citing an improved security situation in the country, which is ruled by the Taliban.


One consideration for resettling Afrikaners not Afghans was that “they could be easily assimilated into our country,” Landau told reporters at the airport.


Trump 
suspended the US refugee settlement
 programme in January, leaving 
more than 100,000 people
 approved for refugee resettlement stranded. Then, in February, he 
signed an executive order
 directing officials to grant refugee status to Afrikaners, whose leaders ruled during apartheid while violently repressing the Black majority.


“It’s a genocide that’s taking place,” Trump told reporters at the White House, when asked why white South Africans were being prioritised for resettlement above victims of famine and war elsewhere on the continent, echoing a far-right conspiracy theory that has also been amplified by his 
South African-born billionaire adviser Elon Musk
.


Oil prices and stock markets worldwide swung through a shaky Monday
 with uncertainty about what will happen with the 
Iran
 war.
The 
S+P 500
 swivelled between gains and losses before finishing with a dip of 0.1% – its second loss since setting an all-time high last week – while the 
Dow Jones Industrial Average
 added 0.3% and the 
Nasdaq
 composite fell 0.5% after both indexes also yo-yoed, the AP reports.
Stocks moved in the opposite direction of oil prices, with the price for a barrel of 
Brent crude 
– the international standard – going from a high of $112 overnight to below $107 in the morning before turning back higher.
After settling at $112.10 per barrel, Brent’s price then fell back below $109 after 
Donald Trump
 said late in the day that he would 
hold off attacking Iran
 on Tuesday at the request of allies in the region, keeping alive hopes of a deal that would reopen the strait of Hormuz.
A jury has ruled in favor of Sam Altman and OpenAI in a legal dispute with Elon Musk.
My colleagues 
Nick Robins-Early
 and 
Dara Kerr
 have the full story:


The federal jury in Oakland, California, found Altman, OpenAI and its president, Greg Brockman, not liable for 
Elon Musk
’s claims that they unjustly enriched themselves and broke a founding contract made with Musk when founding the startup.


The verdict, delivered after less than two hours of deliberation, is a stark rebuke of Musk and his lawyer’s claims that Altman “stole a charity” through his leadership of 
OpenAI
. It also provides the AI firm with a clear path ahead to pursue going public later this year at about a $1tn valuation
.


The state department has announced new sanctions on Cuban government agencies and officials.
 The sanctions target agencies including the Interior Ministry and National Police, as well as 11 government officials, including the chief of staff of the Cuban army and the ministers of justice.
“These sanctions advance the Trump administration’s comprehensive campaign to address the pressing national security threats posed by Cuba’s communist regime and to hold accountable both the regime and those who provide it material support,” secretary of state Marco Rubio said in a statement.
Here’s more on the growing tension between the United States and its neighbor:
The Senate has confirmed former New Mexico congressman Steve Pearce to lead the Bureau of Land Management.
 
Donald Trump
 had selected Pearce, who has supported leasing public lands, at a moment when his administration is opening more public lands to mining, drilling and logging industries.
During his confirmation hearing, Pearce sought to assuage the concerns of Democrats and environmental groups. “The security and economic health of the country, especially the western states, rests squarely with the BLM,” he said. “We can and must balance the different uses of public land. Local economies and future generations depend on us doing our job right.”
Here’s more on Pearce, who Trump nominated to lead the Bureau of Land Management in November:
Nancy Pelosi
 has endorsed San Francisco supervisor 
Connie Chan
 in the race to fill the seat Pelosi will vacate at the end of her term.
“Connie understands San Francisco – our values, our diversity, our communities, and our responsibility to lead with both compassion and strength. She’s a mom who knows her power and knows her why. I am confident Connie is ready to bring clarity and purpose to the work ahead – for the children,” Pelosi said in a new video for the Chan campaign. “At a time when fundamental freedoms and democratic values are under assault, we need a leader in Congress who is prepared to fight — forcefully and effectively – for the people of San Francisco and for the future of our country.”
Here’s my colleague 
Lauren Gambino
 with more on Chan:
Share
Updated at 
19.08 EDT
Lawmakers and national organizations are beginning to share statements denouncing the shooting at the Islamic Center of San Diego.
“I’m heartbroken by the shooting at the Islamic Center of San Diego, and my prayers are with the families of the three precious lives lost today,” said California senator 
Adam Schiff
. “Today’s shooting is a horrific attack on Southern California’s Muslim community. Every American should be able to practice their faith without fear of violence. And we must never be silent in the face of hate.”
“California sends our deepest condolences to the families and communities impacted by today’s shooting,” California governor 
Gavin Newsom
 and first partner Jennifer Siebel Newsom said in a statement. “Worshippers anywhere should not have to fear for their lives. Hate has no place in California, and we will not tolerate acts of terror or intimidation against communities of faith.”
“I’m thankful for the swift and courageous actions of law enforcement and first responders who responded to the shooting at the Islamic Center of San Diego today. They ran toward the gunfire and toward the danger and ultimately saved lives,” said California congresswoman 
Sara Jacobs
.
“No one should have to fear the daily gun violence that plagues our communities, and it is especially terrible to fear being targeted based on race or religion,” former congresswoman 
Gabby Giffords
 said in a statement. “My heart goes out to the Muslim community in San Diego and across the country, and to the families of the three people who should have made it home today. There is no world where armed, violent hate should be tolerated.”
“To God we belong, and to God we return,” 
the Council on American–Islamic Relations
 wrote in a social media post. “No one should ever fear for their safety while attending prayers or studying at an elementary school.”
“We must do everything we can to keep people safe at houses of worship and keep children safe in our schools,” Senate minority leader 
Chuck Schumer
 said in a social media post. “There is no place in our country for this type of violence at mosques, synagogues, churches, or anywhere else.”
“My prayers are with the victims, their families and the Clairemont community,” House minority leader 
Hakeem Jeffries
 said in a social media post. “We must crush Islamophobia and the hatred that is fueling it.”
Share
Updated at 
18.46 EDT
Trump said he postponed striking Iran for two to three days at the request of Saudi Arabia, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates “because they think that they are getting very close to making a deal”.
Answering a second reporter’s question about Iran at his health affordability event, the president challenged the idea that Iran would benefit from more time to negotiate a deal to its favor. 
“
We’ve taken a country that was going to have a nuclear weapon, and we’ve virtually destroyed its military,” Trump said.
He also lamented the economic fallout of the war, but said it was worth the cost. “We don’t want to go through this. We had the greatest economy ever,” Trump said. “But this is the most important thing we can do. We can’t let Iran have a nuclear weapon.”
Share
Updated at 
18.14 EDT
Donald Trump echoed his earlier concerns about mail-in ballots, responding to a reporter’s question about his Truth Social post calling for an investigation into Maryland’s use of mail-in blalots.
“I’ve looked at Maryland for a long time, and I know Maryland pretty well, and I was told that it’s automatically a Democrat state. And I don’t believe that because I think I did really well there and I don’t believe it,” he said. “I’ve asked the, law enforcement to look at it very, very strenuously.”
Donald Trump says $1.7bn compensation fund would be administered by 'committee of very talented people'
Donald Trump said he “wasn’t involved in” the creation of a 
so-called anti-weaponization fund
, but said it had been “well received”.
In response to a follow-up question asking how the fund would be administered and whether the president himself and his family would seek compensation through the fund, Trump said “it’ll all be dependent on a committee” of “very talented people”.
Share
Updated at 
18.16 EDT
Asked by a reporter about the shooting in San Diego, Trump said: “They’re giving a briefing and it’s a terrible situation.”
He added, “we’re going to be going back and looking at it very strongly.”
Share
Updated at 
18.07 EDT