Polycystic ovary syndrome, or PCOS, is being ‚Äårenamed to improve diagnosis and care
                                          | Photo Credit: Getty Images
                                      
A disorder that affects 170 million women worldwide and is the leading cause of ‚Äãinfertility, known as 
polycystic ovary syndrome, or PCOS
, is being ‚Äårenamed to improve diagnosis and care, researchers announced on ‚ÄãTuesday (May 12, 2026) at a medical meeting.
The new name, polyendocrine ‚ÅÝmetabolic ovarian syndrome, or PMOS, was chosen by a global coalition of patients, clinicians and medical organisations to better reflect the ‚Äåcondition‚Äôs wide-ranging hormonal and metabolic impacts, according to a report in 
The Lancet
 published to coincide with ‚Äåa presentation at the European Congress of Endocrinology in ‚ÄåPrague.
The ‚ÅÝname polycystic ovary syndrome often leads women ‚ÅÝand their clinicians to mistakenly associate it with ovarian cysts, which are not necessarily present in every patient, Dr. Terhi Piltonen of the University ‚Äãof Oulu in Finland ‚Äåwrote in a research letter published on Monday (May 11, 2026) in 
JAMA Internal Medicine
. Dr. Piltonen was also lead author of the 
Lancet paper
.
Aims to improve detection, treatment
The focus on ovarian cysts has led to ‚Äådelays in diagnoses and fragmented care, while the ‚Äãnew name aims to improve how the condition is detected, treated and explained, the researchers said.
The consensus ‚ÅÝto rename the condition, led by several research groups and the Androgen Excess and PCOS Society, was based on more ‚Äåthan 14,000 survey responses from patients and health professionals worldwide, as well as two international workshops and input from 56 academic, clinical, and patient organizations, researchers said.
Symptoms of PMOS include irregular or absent menstrual cycles, infertility, pregnancy complications, excess hair growth, acne, anxiety and depression, weight gain, ‚Äåobesity, diabetes and other disturbances in insulin, and cardiovascular disease.
In the ovaries, rather ‚Äãthan cysts, women often have an excess of so-called antral follicles ‚Äî small, fluid-filled sacs containing immature ‚ÅÝeggs.
While the condition is not curable, symptoms are treatable with medications ‚ÅÝand changes in diet and exercise, according to the Endocrine Society.
Plans to transition to the new ‚Äåterminology over the next three years are already in motion, including integrating PMOS into health systems, clinical guidelines, ‚Äãprofessional training, and disease classification, the researchers said.
 Published 
- May 12, 2026 04:51 pm IST