3 min read
Updated: May 18, 2026 06:50 PM IST
 


IPL 2026, Chennai Super Kings (CSK) vs Sunrisers Hyderabad (SRH) Playing 11, Full Squad, Players List: 
Will he or won’t he? MS Dhoni batted in the nets alongside Prashant Veer for 30 minutes on Sunday, facing the throwdown specialists and then the spinners. By the time the clock struck 7.30 PM, he was back in the dressing room. He had done a bit of warm-up in the indoor arena before that, with no trainer by his side for a change. The 44-year-old did a few stretching exercises before waiting for around 15 minutes for his turn to bat.


CSK vs SRH LIVE SCORE, IPL 2026


He has technically been part of the squad but Dhoni has thus far been nowhere close to actually playing a match this season, even not travelling with the team on most away games. But, this could potentially be his last game at the Chepauk Stadium and he has said in the past that he would like to bid goodbye to the 
IPL
 here. Could this be the day that he returns? The result of this match will be significant for 
CSK
’s season though. They need to win every single match from here on and the defeats suffered by 
Rajasthan Royals
 and 
Punjab Kings
 over the weekend.


CSK vs SRH Predicted XII, IPL 2026


Chennai Super Kings
:
Sanju Samson (wk), Ruturaj Gaikwad (c), Urvil Patel, Kartik Sharma, Dewald Brevis, 
Shivam Dube
, Prashant Veer, Dian Forrester/MS Dhoni, Noor Ahmad, Anshul Kamboj, Spencer Johnson, Mukesh Choudhary


Sunrisers Hyderabad
:
 
Abhishek Sharma
, Travis Head, Ishan Kishan (w), Smaran Ravichandran, Heinrich Klaasen, Nitish Kumar Reddy, Salil Arora/Aniket Verma, Pat Cummins (c), Shivang Kumar, Eshan Malinga, Sakib Hussain, Praful Hinge


CSK vs SRH IPL 2026 Squads


Chennai Super Kings: 
Sanju Samson(w), Ruturaj Gaikwad(c), Urvil Patel, Kartik Sharma, Dewald Brevis, Shivam Dube, Prashant Veer, Anshul Kamboj, Noor Ahmad, Spencer Johnson, Mukesh Choudhary, Gurjapneet Singh, Sarfaraz Khan, Akeal Hosein, Matthew Short, Matt Henry, MS Dhoni, Shreyas Gopal, Dian Forrester, Zakary Foulkes, Rahul Chahar, Kuldip Yadav, Akash Madhwal, Aman Khan, Macneil Noronha


Sunrisers Hyderabad:
 Travis Head, Abhishek Sharma, Ishan Kishan(w), Smaran Ravichandran, Heinrich Klaasen, Salil Arora, Nitish Kumar Reddy, Pat Cummins(c), Shivang Kumar, Praful Hinge, Eshan Malinga, Sakib Hussain, Aniket Verma, Liam Livingstone, Harsh Dubey, 
Harshal Patel
, Kamindu Mendis, Dilshan Madushanka, Gerald Coetzee, Jaydev Unadkat, Zeeshan Ansari, Krains Fuletra, Onkar Tarmale, RS Ambrish, Amit Kumar