Rajasthan Royals
 will look to end their run of three consecutive defeats as they host a nothing-to-lose Lucknow Super Giants side in Jaipur in Match 64 of IPL 2026. Sitting sixth on the points table with 12 points from 12 matches, RR need a comprehensive victory to keep their playoff hopes alive.
Two wins will take RR to 16 points, which should be enough to secure a playoff spot outright as SRH beat CSK in Monday’s match and which left only one spot to grab for the playoffs. RR have also lost their last three home matches, piling further pressure on the side. Yashasvi Jaiswal's dip in form, the lower middle order's lack of runs, and their struggles with the ball in the Powerplay have all contributed to the slide.
Although they are out of the playoffs contention, LSG have looked close to being at their dangerous best in recent matches. Mitchell Marsh's imperious form has had a lot to do with that, with the Australian T20 captain posting scores of 111 off 56 against Royal Challengers Bengaluru and 90 off 38 against CSK. Their top order has finally clicked, and their already competitive bowling side with Prince Yadav leading the attack, has taken their returns up a couple of notches.
RR vs LSG
 Head-to-Head
Matches Played: 7
RR Won: 5
LSG Won: 2
RR vs LSG Today IPL Match: Pitch Report
High-scoring contests have been the norm in Jaipur, with first-innings totals exceeding 220 in all three matches at the venue this season. 
Two of those totals were successfully chased down by visiting sides - SRH and DC - while RR were the only team to fall short in a chase, against Gujarat Titans, making it 0-3 for them here this season.The match will be played on pitch number five, where 228 played 229 in the RR vs SRH clash. Vaibhav Sooryavanshi dazzled with his 37-ball 103, but RR eventually lost with nine balls to spare. Dew played a big part in the second innings. Like that game, Tuesday's will also be a night match and the chasing side will have a slight advantage.
RR vs LSG IPL Match: 
Jaipur Weather Update
The daytime temperature in Jaipur is peaking near 42°C, and it is expected to hover around a hot and dry 33°C to 37°C during match time. Skies will be completely clear with a 0% probability of rain. While humidity levels are forecast to remain very low (around 15%), making major dew unlikely, the overwhelming historical chasing advantage at this venue means the captain winning the toss will almost certainly choose to field first.
RR vs LSG Predicted Playing XIs
Rajasthan Royals (RR) Probable XI: Yashasvi Jaiswal (c), Vaibhav Sooryavanshi, Riyan Parag, Dhruv Jurel, Donovan Ferreira, Shimron Hetmyer, Shubham Dubey, Ravindra Jadeja, Jofra Archer, Ravi Bishnoi, Nandre Burger.
Impact Player : Brijesh Sharma / Sandeep Sharma
Lucknow Super Giants (LSG) Probable XI: Mitchell Marsh, Josh Inglis, Nicholas Pooran, Aiden Markram, Rishabh Pant (c & wk), Mukul Choudhary, Abdul Samad, Shahbaz Ahmed, Mohammed Shami, Mayank Yadav, Prince Yadav
Impact Player : Akash Maharaj Singh
RR vs LSG Toss Timing
The crucial toss for Match 64 of IPL 2026 between Rajasthan Royals and Lucknow Super Giants will take place at 7:00 PM IST, with play scheduled to begin at 7:30 PM IST in Sawai Mansingh Stadium, Jaipur.
RR vs LSG: Live Streaming Details
The RR vs LSG clash will be held at the Sawai Mansingh Stadium, Jaipur with the match set to begin at 7:30 PM IST. The game will be broadcast on the Star Sports Network, while live streaming will be available on JioHotstar.