4 min read
Updated: May 15, 2026 02:03 PM IST
 


NEET UG 2026 Re-Exam Date:
 The National Testing Agency has announced that the retest for NEET-UG 2026 will be held on June 21. The NTA posted on X: “The National Testing Agency, with the approval of the Government of India, has scheduled the re-examination of NEET (UG) 2026 on Sunday, 21 June 2026. Candidates and parents are requested to rely only on the official channels of NTA.”


It also gave out contact details in case candidates have queries regarding the development.


Over 22 lakh students are expected to face the re-exam. The NEET-UG 2026 paper leak forced the NTA to scrap the exam that more than 22 lakh students sat for on May 3, 2026. The cancellation of the exam triggered nationwide protests and political outrage.


News agency ANI reported that a high-level meeting was held late on Thursday night at Union Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan’s house. The meeting was attended by the Secretary (Higher Education) Vineet Joshi, Secretary (School Education) Sanjay Kumar, DG of NTA Abhishek Singh, 
CBSE
 Chairperson, and the Commissioners of the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS) and Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti (NVS), along with other senior officials.


ALSO READ | 
Setting room to press to exam hall: NEET paper trail is CBI probe focus


NEET-UG paper leak: What happened


The exam was conducted across thousands of centres under what officials described as “full security protocols”. But within days, reports of malpractice surfaced. Authorities believe the leaked paper was circulated nearly 45 hours before the examination through WhatsApp. The leaked paper was disguised as a “model question paper” to avoid suspicion.


NTA Director General Abhishek Singh explained that officials first learnt of the suspected leak on May 7, when a whistleblower flagged WhatsApp messages circulating with questions that appeared identical to those in the actual test. After verification, the agency confirmed that several questions matched the official NEET-UG 2026 paper.
Story continues below this ad


Investigations revealed that a document containing approximately 410 questions had been circulating on WhatsApp groups for between 15 days and a month before the exam.


ALSO READ | 
The Brothers Biwal: Rajasthan family that saw 4 kids crack NEET last year now at centre of leak storm


Union Education Minister says NEET-UG to be computer based from next year


After the announcement of the new schedule, Pradhan addressed the media. In his first public remarks after the NEET-UG exam was cancelled, he said the move was necessary to prevent any deserving candidate to be hit by the malpractices of “exam mafia”. “A wrong candidate through the education mafia cannot steal the rights of another. Our policy is of zero tolerance.”


“Our priority is the well-being of students. The exam was held on May 3. On May 7, NTA received information of a guess paper having questions from the exam. In 3-4 days, we were able to confirm that questions were out in the guise of guess papers.”
Story continues below this ad


“We will give students the option of deciding in which city they want to give the retest. The window will remain open. By June 14 the admit cards will be distributed for the retest. Candidates will get an additional 15 mins in the retest,” Pradhan further said.


The NTA has handed the probe over to the CBI, which will look into the chain of command where there was a breach, despite implementing the Radhakrishnan committee’s recommendations. He said no malpractices will be allowed this time.


He also said that the NEET-UG exam will be computer-based from next year.