NEW DELHI: Contradicting the statement of their sports science head, Punjab Kings on Monday issued a clarification on the fitness of pacer 
Arshdeep Singh
, saying the left-arm seamer is “fully fit” and training regularly with the squad despite recent concerns over his physical condition.
The franchise released the statement a day after their 23-run defeat to Royal Challengers Bengaluru in IPL 2026, which marked PBKS’ sixth straight defeat in the tournament.
“Contrary to reports, we would like to confirm that our leading fast bowler and highest wicket-taker, Arshdeep Singh, is fully fit and has been actively training with the squad."
“The team management is absolutely pleased with his progress, and he is raring to go as we head into a crucial contest of the tournament," the statement read.
“His energy, rhythm, and commitment in the nets have been extremely encouraging, and we are confident that he will continue to play a key role for Punjab Kings moving forward as well.”
The statement came after PBKS head of sports science Andrew Leipus had indicated before the RCB match that Arshdeep was dealing with
 some physical restrictions
 during the season.
"We’ve been working together a little bit and looking at his body if there’s any restrictions in his body that might be a reason for some of his performances being up and down. 
We think we’ve hit on a bit of a winner there. He’s been feeling a lot better in the last couple of weeks, physically," Leipus had said while responding to a query from The Times of India in Dharamshala.
Arshdeep has not looked at his usual level in recent matches and has struggled to execute yorkers and bouncers consistently during pressure situations. Against RCB in Dharamshala on Sunday, he conceded 43 runs in four overs at an economy rate of 10.75 while taking one wicket.
The pacer has also been involved in social media controversies in recent weeks, adding to the scrutiny around his performances.
PBKS’ campaign has slipped sharply over the last three weeks. The team, which had built momentum in the first half of the tournament, now faces the risk of missing the playoffs after six losses in a row.
Punjab Kings have one league match remaining against Lucknow Super Giants and can finish with a maximum of 15 points. However, they also need other results to go in their favour to qualify for the playoffs.
Is it fair to question performance of  Arshdeep Singh based on social media controversies?