Niti Taylor is back as Nandini in Kaisi Yeh Yaariaan 3(KYY3). The popular youth show is back with its third installment on Voot, and Niti promises that this season will provide you with triple dose of entertainment.
In an exclusive conversation with India Today Online, Niti Taylor talked about her equation with Parth, working with the new cast and enjoying shooting for digital medium.
Excerpts:




What's new this season. 
It's triple the love, triple the fight, triple the drama. It has a triple dose of everything. It's going to be different, as earlier the story revolved around college days but now the story focuses how people balance between a career and relationship.
In the second season, you and Manik leave for Denmark. So what's next? 
This is when we've returned from Denmark. The story has taken a 4-year leap. Manik is an established singer and doing his gaana-bajaana and I am doing my scientist thing.
How was it getting back to KYY after two years? 
I was actually very nervous the first day, as after two years I didn't know how is it going to be. But, it was like a cakewalk. It was so much fun. This season has been the best season.
What was so special about this season? 
In these years, we have (Parth Samthaan and I) matured as actors. I have grown as a person. I was a different person when I started the show. The scenes turned out to be better than expected. It was very natural and nothing over-dramatic. While when we shoot for TV, they need a little more drama. But over here, it was more real.
What's the difference between shooting for web and TV? 
When we shoot for TV, we are driven by deadlines because of which quality gets compromised. Over here, we have the liberty to take as many retakes we want. Every frame is so beautifully lit. They have taken care of every aspect of filming to get the perfect shot.
You are going to play Nandini for the third time. What is it that you like and dislike about her? 
I like about her is that she is a strong opinionated girl. And she is always so positive. Even if something bad happens, she will find something good in it. Now, the bad thing about her is that because she is in love, she has made him her entire world. I think it is very important for an individual to look beyond the person they love. They love one person is okay and I respect that but there are other things that also matters. I am not saying something will happen but what if something happens and that person is not there, you will die in that loneliness because you made that person your world.
How similar or different are you to Nandini? 
I am more bubbly. Nandini is like subtle but I am more like over the top. I am someone who wants to experience everything. I am of the believe that one should try everything in their life at least once. She is more disciplined. I am also disciplined but not like her. Just like Nandini, even I try to overlook negativity and I am not an insecure person.


Kaisi Yeh Yaariaan 3 has a lot of faces missing from Season 1 and 2. Whom did you miss the most? 
I miss my best friend, that is Navya Naveli - Veebha Anand. She was a fun element and a different item altogether. I miss her the most because I joined Fab 5 towards the end. Having said that, the new cast is equally good and we've had crazy fun. Everyone has done so much work and there is so much to learn from each one of them.
Also read: Exclusive: Parth Samthaan talks about Kaisi Yeh Yaariaan 3 and his crazy fandom
There were reports of you and Parth not getting along. Was it awkward getting back together for the third season. 
No, we are like house on fire. I don't know how we've done the scenes because half the time we kept laughing while shooting.
Fans want to see more of you on screen. Apart from KYY3, any reality shows that you would want to be a part of? 
I wish I can do Jhalak (Dikhhla Jaa). It is something I want to do. I wish I get Jhalak but no Bigg Boss. I am a big fan but no, because it turns you into something you are not.


Published By: 
shweta keshri
Published On: 
May 16, 2018 18:45 IST
--- ENDS ---