Rajasthan Royals' Vaibhav Sooryavanshi during an Indian Premier League (IPL) 2026 T20 cricket match between Delhi Capitals and Rajasthan Royals, in New Delhi on May 17, 2026.
                                          | Photo Credit: PTI
                                      
Vaibhav Sooryavanshi’s blistering 21-ball 46 laid the foundation for what looked like a towering Rajasthan Royals total, before Mitchell Starc’s fiery spell at the death dragged Delhi Capitals back into the contest.
Sooryavanshi fell to a slower delivery from Madhav Tiwari, not the first time a change of pace proved effective in dismissing the 15-year-old this season. But RR batting coach Vikram Rathour dismissed suggestions that pace variation is a glaring weakness in the youngster’s game.
“Nobody is perfect. Everybody will have some weakness here and there. I don’t think slow ball is a weakness for him. I want bowlers to try that. On a wicket like this, where the ball is gripping a bit, a change of pace is good against anybody. It’s not only Vaibhav, who is a special player. Enough has been said about his ability and how good he is,” he opined.
“He provided us with a really good start. I just hope he converts one inning and goes deeper. The way he is batting and the way he prepares, I am sure that’s not too far off. We will see one of those innings which he will really convert and play a big knock. Otherwise, we are pretty happy with the way he is batting. We want him to bat that way.”
The former India batter also stressed that T20 success does not demand a one-dimensional approach, citing Virat Kohli as proof that batters. 
“Somebody like Virat is still extremely successful, even in this format. I won’t call him an out-and-out power-hitting player. That tells you that there’s scope for everybody to succeed, provided you have belief in your abilities and can commit to whatever options you take while you are batting. Back yourself.”
“You need to identify and know your strengths. And if you back your strengths and you play to your strengths, you can score runs. Dhruv (Jurel) need not bat like Vaibhav. Vaibhav shouldn’t look to bat like Dhruv. They have their own strengths and own ways of scoring. If they keep backing that and keep believing in their ability, they can succeed easily and we’ve seen that happening.”
Rathour also clarified that Ravindra Jadeja’s absence was down to a niggle rather than workload management, contrary to skipper Riyan Parag’s remarks before the match.
 Published 
- May 18, 2026 04:30 am IST